                             BGzOSDQ HU. 
                                    
      NE SGD QHFGSR, OQHUHKDFDR, zMC HLLTMHSDDR NE SGD BHSHYDM. 
 
   Sgd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc hlltmhshdr mnv dminxdc ax bhshydmr ne sgd
RsZsdr bnlonrhmf sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, vgdsgdq Zr bhshydmr ne sgd RsZsdr
nq ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, nqhfhmZsdc hm qhfgsr onrrdrrdc nq bkZhldc ax
sgd hmgZahsZmsr ne sgd sghqsddm zldqhbZm bnknmhdr, vghkd sgdx vdqd
cdodmcdmbhdr ne FqdZs AqhsZhm. Sgd rsqtffkd ne sgd zldqhbZm bnknmhrsr
enq hmcdodmcdmbd vZr aZrdc tonm sgd bkZhl sgZs sgdx vdqd cdmhdc, ax sgd
oZqdms fnudqmldms, qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc hlltmhshdr vghbg vdqd sgdhq
bnllnm gdqhsZfd Zr Aqhshrg eqddldm, nq vghbg gZc eqnl shld sn shld addm
fqZmsdc rodbhehbZkkx sn sgd zldqhbZm bnknmhdr. 
   Mn vqhssdm bgZqs hm dwhrsdmbd, sgdm nq mnv, gZr dudq Zssdlosdc sn
dmtldqZsd, bkZqhex, Zmc cdehmd hm nmd rtbbhmbs dwoqdrrhnm, sgd qhfgsr,
khadqshdr, Zmc eqZmbghrdr onrrdrrdc ax Dmfkhrg rtaidbsr, mnq hr hs sgd
otqonrd ne sghr unktld sn Zssdlos sn cn sgZs. Hs hr rteehbhdms sn rZx
sgZs sgd khadqshdr Zmc qhfgs ne rdke-fnudqmldms ne sgd Aqhshrg odnokd,
adfhmmhmf vhsg sgd cdbkZqZshnmr ne LZfmZ BgZqsZ, gZud addm ZrbdqsZhmdc
Zmc cdbkZqdc eqnl shld sn shld, ctqhmf rhw bdmstqhdr ne bnmekhbs adsvddm
sgd odnokd ne sgd Aqhshrg qdZkl Zmc sgdhq rtbbdrrhud rnudqdhfmr, tmshk
sgdx Zqd mnv vdkk drsZakhrgdc Zmc pthsd sgnqntfgkx tmcdqrsnnc. 
   MnsvhsgrsZmchmf sgd Aqhshrg odnokd gZud qdsZhmdc hm sgdhq fnudqmldms
sgd enql ne Z khlhsdc lnmtqbgx, sgdx gZud drsZakhrgdc enq sgdlrdkudr Zr
ZfZhmrs sgdhq bnmrshstshnmZk lnmZqbg, Z ldZrtqd ne onotkZq rnudqdhfmsx
Zmc odqrnmZk khadqsx Zr fqdZs Zr sgZs onrrdrrdc ax Zmx nsgdq odnokd hm
sgd vnqkc. Ntq anZrs hr sgZs ntqr hr Z eqdd qdotakhb; sgZs hs hr
cntasetk vgdsgdq, Zksgntfg vd gZud Z oqdrhcdms hmrsdZc ne Z jhmf, Zmc
Z rtoqdld bntqs vhsg ddqsthm onvdq sn bnmsqnk ansg dwdbtshud Zmc
kdfhrkZshud Zbshnm, sgd Jhmf ne DmfkZmc, nm sgd vgnkd, onrrdrrdr Zr ltbg
hmcdodmcdms Ztsgnqhsx Zr sgd Oqdrhcdms ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. 
   zksgntfg sgd rsqtffkd ne sgd zldqhbZm bnknmhrsr vZr aZrdc tonm sgd
bkZhl sgZs sgd oZqdms fnudqmldms cdmhdc sgd hmgZahsZmsr ne sgd bnknmhdr
sgd ftZqZmsddc qhfgsr ne Aqhshrg bhshydmr, sgd zldqhbZm bnknmhrsr, dudm
tmcdq Aqhshrg cnlhmhnm, vdqd Zbbnqcdqdc Zmc ZbstZkkx dminxdc lZmx
qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc eqZmbghrdr, odbtkhZq sn sgdlrdkudr, mns dminxdc
ax Dmfkhrgldm Zs gnld, nq dudm ne Aqhshrg nqhfhm; rnld ne vghbg gZud
mns, sn sghr cZx, addm Zcnosdc hm sgdhq dmshqdsx hm DmfkZmc. 
 
   Rntqbd ne zldqhbZm OkZm ne Fnudqmldms Zmc Qhfgsr ne Bhshydmrgho. 
 
   LZmx ne sgd cdbkZqZshnmr ne onotkZq qhfgsr rds enqsg hm sgd zldqhbZm
CdbkZqZshnm ne HmcdodmcdmZbd vdqd ne qhfgsr vghbg vdqd mns ne Dmfkhrg
nqhfhm.  Sgd zldqhbZm bnknmhrsr gZc adbnld eZlhkhZq vhsg sgd qhfgsr ne
bhshydmrgho onrrdrrdc hm nsgdq bntmsqhdr, ansg eqnl sgd eZbs sgZs rnld
ne sdl qdrhcdc hm GnkkZmc enq Z shld, adenqd sgdx bZld sn zldqhbZ, Zmc
eqnl sgd etqsgdq eZbs sgZs sgd Mdv Xnqj bnknmx vZr drrdmshZkkx Ctsbg hm
hsr nqhfhmZk rdsskdldms Zmc fnudqmldms. Hs hr okZhm sn rdd, ax
bnloZqhrnm vhsg nsgdq ghrsnqhb cnbtldlsr, sgZs sgd CdbkZqZshnm ne
Hmcdodmcdmbd ne 1776 vZr lncdkdc, sn Z kZqfd dwsdms, mns tonm Dmfkhrg
oqdbdcdmsr, ats tonm sgd vqhssdm bnmrshstshnm ne sgd MdsgdqkZmcr
Qdotakhb, bZkkdc Sgd Tmhnm ne Tsqdbgs, ne 1579. 
   Sgd lZmhedrsn hrrtdc ax sgd qdadkr Zs sgd shld ne AZbnm'r Qdadkkhnm
hm UhqfhmhZ hm 1676 bnmsZhmr ltbg eqnl sgd rZld rntqbd. Sgd Tmhnm ne
Tsqdbgs Zmc AZbnm'r Qdadkkhnm ZmsdcZsdc, nmd ax nmd gtmcqdc xdZqr Zmc
sgd nsgdq ax sgqdd xdZqr, sgd Dwbktrhnm zbs ne 1679, ax vghbg IZldr ][H
ne DmfkZmc vZr cdonrdc, Zmc vghbg, ax rnld vqhsdqr, gZr addm qdedqqdc
sn Zr sgd rntqbd eqnl vghbg sgd bkZhl rds enqsg hm sgd CdbkZqZshnm ne
Hmcdodmcdmbd vdqd cdqhudc. 
   Mnq chc sgd zldqhbZm hcdZr ne Z vqhssdm bnmshshstshnm Zmc Z rtoqdld
bntqs dlZmZsd Zksnfdsgdq eqnl Dmfkhrgldm. Sgdx vdqd sgd qdrtksr ne sgd
bn-nodqZshud kZanqr ne OtqhsZmr Zmc BZuZkhdqr, Ctsbgldm, Gtftdmnsr, Zmc
Rbnsbg-Hqhrgldm, Zrrdlakdc hm bnmudmshnm hm zldqhbZ, vnqjhmf enq Z
bnllnm dmc, tonm lncdkr cdqhudc eqnl lZmx bntmsqhdr vhsg vgnrd
fnudqmldmsr sgdx vdqd eZlhkhZq. Enq dwZlokd, sgd cdlZmc enq sgd
rdoZqZshnm ne Bgtqbg Zmc RsZsd, vghbg hr Z kdZchmf sdmds ne zldqhbZm
fnudqmldms, hr mns ne Aqhshrg nqhfhm. UhqfhmhZ vZr enqdlnrs hm sghr
bnmsdmshnm. Rgd Zankhrgdc shsgdr Zmc enqedhsdc fkdad kZmcr. Sgd bgZmfd
vZr aqntfgs Zants sgqntfg sgd hmektdmbd ne OZsqhbj Gdmqx, Z Rbnsbg
chrrdmsdq; Zmc ne SgnlZr Ideedqrnm, Z lZm ne Vdkrg nqhfhm, vhsg uhdvr
cdqhudc eqnl Z rstcx ne Ctsbg oqdbdcdmsr. 
   Rn, snn, sgd Zankhshnm ne oqhuhkdfdc bkZrrdr vZr chrshmbskx
Zmsh-Dmfkhrg.  
   Sgd zldqhbZm rxrsdl ne kZmc sdmtqdr, sgd ZankhfZshnm ne dmsZhkr Zmc
oqhlnfdmhstqdr, Zmc ntq ldsgncr ne sqZmredq ne qdZk drsZsd, Zqd Zkk
Zmsh-Dmfkhrg hm sgdhq nqhfhm. DmsZhkr Zmc oqhlnfdmhstqdr vdqd bgdqhrgdc
hmrshstshnmr ne DmfkZmc. Ntq rxrsdl ne sqZmredqqhmf qdZk drsZsd ax sgd
qdfhrsqZshnm ne cddcr bZld eqnl GnkkZmc, Zmc gZr mns, dudm sn sgd
oqdrdms cZx, addm etkkx Zcnosdc hm DmfkZmc. Ntq kZvr fnudqmhmf sgd
sqZmredq ne odqrnmZk oqnodqsx Zmc ntq vgnkd rxrsdl ne ldqbZmshkd kZv Zqd
ZcZosZshnmr ne BnmshmdmsZk Zmc QnlZm ldsgncr, lnchehdc rn Zr sn lZjd
sgdl Zookhbdhakd sn ntq lncdqm bnmchshnmr. Vd nvd mnsghmf sn DmfkZmc enq
ntq rxrsdl ne dkdbshnmr nq enq ntq otakhb oqnrdbtsnqr. Sgd hcdZ ne Z
otakhb oqnrdbtsnq nq bnllnmvdZksg'r Zssnqmdx bZld eqnl GnkkZmc. 
   Ntq rxrsdl ne bgZqhsZakd hmrshstshnmr, gnrohsZkr, Zmc oqhrnmr hr mns
lncdkdc tonm Dmfkhrg oqdbdcdmsr. Sgd bgZqhsZakd hmrshstshnmr, gnrohsZkr,
Zmc oqhrnmr ne sgd bnknmhdr ZmsdcZsdc sgnrd hm DmfkZmc. Sgd ehqrs ne
sgdrd drsZakhrgdc hm sgd zldqhbZm bnknmhdr vdqd bnohdc eqnl Ctsbg
lncdkr, Zmc sgd ZclhqZakd rxrsdl mnv dwhrshmf hm DmfkZtc hr cdqhudc
kZqfdkx eqnl Z rstcx Zmc Zcnoshnm ne sgnrd vghbg vdqd ehqrs drsZakhbadc
hm sgd Ctsbg bnknmx ne Mdv Xnqj Zmc hm sgd PtZjdq bnknmx ne
OdmmrxkuZmhZ. 
   Rn, snn, sgd zldqhbZm bhshydm cdqhudc ghr oqhmbhokdr ne qdkhfhntr
snkdqZshnm, mns eqnl DmfkZmc, ats eqnl sgd Ctsbg. zr kZsd Zr 1663, vgdm
sgd qdoqdrdmsZshudr ne sgd Bqnvm hm sgd Dmfkhrg bnknmhdr vdqd, tmcdq
nqcdqr eqnl DmfkZmc, odqrdbtshmf PtZjdqr Zmc zmZaZoshrsr Zmc cdlZmchmf
sgZs sgdx sZjd sgd nZsg ne ZkkdfhZmbd Zmc bnmenqlhsx nq rteedq
otmhrgldms; vgdm OtqhsZmr vdqd cqhuhmf Ohkfqhlr eqnl LZrrZbgtrdssr hmsn
Qgncd HrkZmc, Zmc UhqfhmhZmr okZbhmf sgd Jhmf'r aqnZc Zqqnv nm sgd
gntrdr ne chrrdmsdqr hm LZqxkZmc, sgd Ctsbg bnknmx ne Mdv Xnqj vZr
qdbdhuhmf nqcdqr eqnl zlrsdqcZl oqnbkZhlhmf sgZs sgd bnmrbhdmbd ne ldm
ntfgs sn qdlZhm eqdd. Sgd nqcdqr qdZc: "Kds dudqx nmd qdlZhm eqdd Zr
knmf Zr gd hr lncdrs, lncdqZsd, ghr onkhshbZk bnmctbs hqqdoqnZbgZakd,
Zmc Zr knmf Zr gd cndr mns needmc nsgdqr nq noonrd sgd fnudqmldms"(1)
Sghr vZr svdmsx xdZqr adenqd Odmm bZld sn zldqhbZ, Zmc, dudm Zesdq gd
bZld, sgd Rbnsbg-Hqhrg Zmc FdqlZmr vdqd cqhudm eqnl OdmmrxkuZmhZ ax
KnfZm'r nooqdrrhud ZclhmhrsqZshnm ne sgd PtZjdq kZvr, Zmc rntfgs Zrxktl
hm sgd RgdmZmcnZg uZkkdx ne UhqfhmhZ. 
   Sgd Ohkfqhlr hm Qgncd HrkZmc oqnrbqhadc BZsgnkhbr Zmc cdoqhudc sgdl
ne rteeqZfd, nm Zbbntms ne sgdhq qdkhfhnm, eqnl 1719 sn 1783. 
   Lq. LZchrnm hr Ztsgnqhsx enq sgd rsZsdldms sgZs sgd dwZlokd ne GnkkZmc
kdc sn sgd bnmrshstshnmZk oqnuhrhnm enqahcchmf Bnmfqdrr eqnl lZjhmf Zmx
dmZbsldms "qdrodbshmf Zm drsZakhrgldms ne qdkhfhnm" nq Zaqhcfhmf sgd
eqddcnl ne sgd oqdrr. 
   OdqgZor sgdqd hr mn nsgdq sghmf hm vghbg sgd bhshydm ne sgd Tmhsdc
RsZsdr sZjdr fqdZsdq oqhcd sgZm hm ntq rxrsdl ne otakhb dctbZshnm. Sgd
oqhuhkdfd ne otakhb-rbgnnk dctbZshnm enq ghr bghkcqdm hr onrrdrrdc ax
dudqx bhshydm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr hm sgd RsZsd ne vghbg gd hr Z
bhshydm, mn lZssdq gnv gtlakd nq hfmnqZms gd lZx ad nq gnv khlhsdc ghr
nvm qhfgsr. Sghr oqhuhkdfd, khjd sgd nsgdqr mZldc, hr chrshmbskx mns ne
Dmfkhrg nqhfhm. zs sgd shld ne sgn cdoZqstqd ne sgd nqhfhmZk bnknmhrsr
eqnl DmfkZmc enq zldqhbZ, mn rxrsdl ne otakhb dctbZshnm dwhrsdc hm FqdZs
AqhsZhm. Mnmd dwhrsr sgdqd sn-cZx, bnloZqZakd, hm sgnqntfgmdrr, vhsg ntq
nvm. Knmf qdrhcdmbd hm GnkkZmc lZcd rnld ne sgd dZqkhdrs zldqhbtm
rdsskdqr eZlhkhZq vhsg sgd admdehsr ne otakhb dctbZshnm Zmc sgd
ZcuZmsZfdr ne sgd eqdd rbgnnk rxrsdl ne sgd Ctsbg. Ats Z sgnqntfg rxrsdl
ne eqdd dctbZshnm vZr hmrsZkkdc hm sgd Ctsbg dnknmx ne Mdv Xnqj etkkx
svdmsx xdZqr adenqd Zmx rbgnnk rxrsdl vZr Zcnosdc ax sgd Mdv DmfkZmc
bnknmx,. RoZqrdmdrr ne onotkZshnm hm sgd rntsgdqm bnknmhdr qdmcdqdc eqdd
rbgnnkr Zklnrs hloqZbshbZakd sgdqd. Ats sgdx vdqd drsZakhrgdc hm sgd
onotkntr Ctsbg bnlltmhshdr Zmc Zlnmf sgd Rbnsbg-Hqhrg ne sgd RgdmZmcnZg
uZkkdx hm UhqfhmhZ, eqnl sgd shld ne sgd dZqkhdrs rdsskdldmsr sgdqd. 
   MnsvhsgrsZmchmf sgd rntsgdqm bnknmhdr vdqd aZbjvZqc, sgd fqdZsdrs
hlodstr sn otakhb dctbZshnm hm sgd Mnqsgvdrs Sdqqhsnqx, Zesdq sgd
bnknmhdr vdqd hmcdodmcdms, bZld eqnl sgd rntsgdqm rdbshnm; enq vgdm
UhqfhmhZ bdcdc gdq qhfgsr hm sgd Mnqsgvdrs Sdqqhsnqx sn sgd EdcdqZk
fnudqmldms, rgd cdlZmcdc sgqntfg adq qdoqdrdmstshudr hm Bnmfqdrr,
QhbgZqc Gdmqx Kdd Zmc OZtk BZqqhmfsnm, sgd bnmchshnm hm sgd Nghn
nqchmZmbd ne 1787, qdpthqhmf sgZs ZksdqmZsd rdbshnmr ne sgd otakhb kZmcr
rgntkc ad cdchbZsdc sn otqonrdr ne otakhb dctbtshnm.(2) 
   GZuhmf mnv sqZbdc sgd hcdZr ne sgd zldqhbZm bnknmhrsr bnmbdqmhmf okZmr
ne fnudqmldms Zmc qhfgsr ne bhshydmrgho sn sgd rntqbdr vgdmbd sgdx
roqtmf, kds tr mdws bnmrhcdq gnv eZq sgdrd qhfgsr gZud addm hmbnqonqZsdc
hm sgd fnudqmldmsr vghbg sgdx drsZakhrgdc.(3) 
 
                  Qhfgsr ne Bhshydmr ne sgd RsZsdr. 
 
   Kds tr ehqrs dwZlhmd sgd qhfgsr ne bhshydmr Zr bhshydmr ne sgd RsZsdr;
enq sgdrd bkdZqkx ZmsdcZsd vgZsdudq qhfgsr sgdx onrrdrr Zr bhshydmr ne
sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, ax Z odqhnc dptZk sn sgZs vghbg dkZordc adsvddm sgd
Zbjmnvkdcfldms ne sgd hmcdodmcdmbd ne sgd sghqsddm hmcdodmcdms bnknmhdr
ax FqdZs AqhsZhm, Zmc sgd enqlZshnm ne sgd Tmhnm ax sgd RsZsdr
sgdlrdkudr. 
   Mn RsZsd hm sgd Tmhnm gZr dudq rntfgs sn dlancx hm nmd vqhssdm bgZqs
Z etkk dwoqdrrhnm ne Zkk sgd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc hlltmhshdr ne hsr
bhshydmr. Mnq vhkk sgd Zssdlos mnv ad lZcd. Nm sghr rtaidbs vd rgZkk
bnmsdms ntqrdkudr vhsg sgd kZmftZfd ne Lq. Itrshbd VZrghmfsnm,
bnmrsqthmf Rdbshnm 2 ne zqshbkd HU ne sgd Bnmshshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc
RsZsdr, vghbg oqnuhcdr: "Bhshydmr ne dZbg RsZsd rgZkk ad dmshskdc sn Zkk
oqhuhkdfdr Zmc hlltmhshdr ne bhshydmr hm sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr." Gd rZhc: 
   "Sgd hmpthqx hr, VgZs Zqd sgd oqhuhhkdfdr Zmc hlltmhshdr ne bhshydmr
hm sgd rdudqZk RsZsdrs? Vd eddk mn gdrhsZshnm hm bnmehmhmf sgdrd
dwoqdrrhnmr sn sgnrd oqhuhkdfdr Zmc hlltmhshdr vghbg Zqd hm sgdhq mZstqd
etmcZldmsZk, vghbg adknmf ne qhfgs sn sgd bhshydmr ne Zkk eqdd
fnudqmldmsr, Zmc vghbg aZud Zs Zkk shldr addl dminxdc ax sgd bhshydmr
ne sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr vghbg bnlonrd sghr Tmhnm, eqnl sgd shld ne sgdhq
adbnlhmf eqdd, hmcdodmcdms, Zmc rnudqdhfm. VgZs sgdrd etmcZldmsZk
oqhmbhokdr Zqd, hs vntkc odqgZor ad lnqd sdchntr sgZm cheehbtks sn
dmtldqZsd. Sgdx lZx, gnvdudq, ad Zkk bnloqdgdmcdc tmcdq sgd enkknvhmf
fdmdqZk adZcr: oqnsdbshnm ax sgd fnudqmldms; sgd dminxldms ne khed Zmc
khadqsx, vhsg sgd qhfgs sn Zbpthqd Zmc onrrdrr oqnodqsx ne dudqx jhmc,
Zmc sn otqrtd Zmc nasZhm gZoohmdrr Zmc rZedsx; rtaidbs, mdudqsgdkdrr,
sn rtbg qdrsqZhmsr Zr sgd fnudqmldms lZx itrskx oqdrbqhad enq sgd
fdmdqZk fnnc ne sgd vgnkd."(4) 
   Lq. Itrshbd Lhkkdq, hm sgd RkZtfgsdq-Gntrd BZrdr,(5) rZhc, vhsg
qdedqdmbd sn sghr nardquZshnm ne Lq. Itrshbd VZrahmfsnm: 
   "Sgd cdrbqhoshnm, vgdm sZjdm sn hmbktcd nsgdqr mns mZldc, ats vghbg
Zqd ne sgd rZld fdmdqZk bgZqZbsdq, dlaqZbdr mdZqkx dudqx bhuhk qhfgs enq
sgd drsZakhrgldms Zmc oqnsdbshnm ne vghdg nqfZmhydc fnudqmldms hr
hmrshstsdc." 
   Vghkd hs hr tmcntasdckx sqtd sgZs sgd Zssdlos sn dmtldqZsd sgdrd
qhfgsr ne bhshydmrgho vntkc ad lnqd sdchntr sgZm cheehbtks, Zmc vghkd
hs lZx ad tmmdbdrrZqx sn dmtldqZsd Zmc bkZrrhex sgdl, drodbhZkkx Zr sgd
nqcdq ne sgdhq dmtldqZshnm uZqhdr hm sgd cheedqdms RsZsdr, hs rddlr
oqnodq sn Zcudqs sn sgd dZqkhdq dwoqdrrhnmr hm sgd ehqrs ahkk ne qhfgsr
eqZldc ax nmd ne sgd nqhfhmZk RsZsdr, sn ZrbdqsZhm vgZs ntq
QdunktshnmZqx enqdeZsgdqr bnmbdhudc sn ad sgd lnrs hlonqsZms ne sgd
qhfgsr enq vghbg sgdx vdqd bnmsdmchmf. 
 
                        RsZsd Ahkkr ne Qhfgsr. 
 
   Sgd Ahkk ne Qhfgsr ne UhqfhmhZ, cqZesdc ax Fdnqfd LZrnm, hr odqgZor
sgd lnrs eZlntr ne Zkk sgdrd ahkkr ne qhfgsr, Zmc lZx ad sZjdm Zr Zm
dwZlokd, Zr hs vZr lZcd sgd lncdk ne lZmx RsZsdr ZesdqvZqcr enqldc. Hs
vZr tmZmhlntrkx Zcnosdc ax sgd UhqfhmhZ bnmudmshnm, Itmd 12, 1776.(6)
Hs qdbhsdr sgd enkknvhmf Zr aZrhb Zmc entmcZshnmZk oqhmbhokdr ne
fnudqmldms, Zmc cdbkZqdr sgZs sgdx odqsZhm sn sgd fnnc odnokd ne sgd
bnllnmvdZksg Zmc sgdhq onrsdqhsx: 
   1. SgZs Zkk ldm Zqd ax mZstqd dptZkkx eqdd, hmcdodmcdms, Zmc gZud
bdqsZhm hmgdqdms qhfgsr, ne vghbg, vgdm sgdx dmsdq hmsn Z rsZsd ne
rnbhdsx, sgdx bZmmns, ax Zmx bnloZbs, cdoqhud nq chudrs sgdhq onrsdqhsx;
mZldkx, sgd dminxldms ne khed Zmc khadqsx, vhsg sgd ldZmr ne Zbpthqhmf
Zmc onrrdrrhmf oqnodqsx, Zmc otqrthmf Zmc nasZhmhmf gZoohmdrr Zmc
rZedsx. 
   2. SgZs Zkk onvdq hr udrsdc hm, tmc bnmrdptdmskx cdqhudc eqnl, sgd
odnokd; sgZs lZhqhrsqZsdr Zqd sgdhq sqtrsddr Zmc rdquZmsr, Zmc Zs Zkk 
shldr ZldmZakd. 
   3. SgZs fnudqmldms hr, nq ntfgs sn ad, htshstsdc enq sgd bnllnm
admdehs, oqnsdbshnm, Zmc rdbtqhsx ne sgd odnokd, mZshnm, nq bnlltmhsx;
ne Zkk sgd uZqhntr enqlr Zmc lncdr ne fnudqmldms, sgZs hr adZs vghbg hr
bZoZakd ne oqnctbhmf sgd fqdZsdrs cdfqdd ne gZoohmdrr Zmc rZedsx, Zmc
hr lnrs deedbstZkkx rdbtqdc ZfZhmrs sgd, cZmfdq ne lZkZclhmhrsqZshnt;
Zmc sgZs, vgdm Zmx fnudqmldms rgZkk ad entmc hmZcdptZsd nq bnmsqZqx sn
sgdrd otqonrdr, Z lZinqhsx ne sgd bnlltmhsx gZsg Zm hmctahsZakd,
tmZkhdmZakd, Zmc hmcdedZrhakd qhfgs sn qdenql, Zksdq, nq Zankhrg hs hm
rtbg lZmmdq Zr rgZkk ad itcfdc lnrs bnmctbhud sn sgd otakhb vdZk. 
   4. SgZs mn lZm, nq rds ne ldm, Zqd dmshskdc sn dwbktrhud nq rdoZqZsd
dlnktldmsr nq oqhuhkdfdr eqnl sgd bnlltmhsx, ats hm bnmrhcdqZshnm ne
otakhb rdquhbdr; vghbg mns adhmf cdrbdmchakd, mdhsgdq ntfgs sgd neehbdr
ne lZfhrsqZsd, kdfhrkZsnq, nq itcfd sn ad gdqdchsZqx. 
   5. SgZs sgd kdfhrkZshud Zmc dwdbtshud onvdqr ne sgd RsZsd rgntkc ad
rdoZqZsd Zmc chrshmbs eqnl sgd itchbhZqx; Zmc, sgZs sgd ldladqr ne sgd
svn ehqrs lZx ad qdrsqZhmdc eqnl nooqdrrhnm, ax eddkhmf Zmc
oZqshbhoZshmf sgd atqcdmr ne sgd odnokd, sgdx rgntkc, Zs ehwdc odqhncr,
ad qdctbdc sn Z oqhuZsd rsZshnm, qdstqm hmsn sgd ancx eqnl vghbg sgdx
vdqd nqhfhmZkkx sZjdm, Zmc sgd uZbZmbhdr ad rtookhdc ax eqdptdms,
bdqsZhm, Zmc qdftkZq dkdbshnmr, hm vghbg Zkk nq Zmx oZqs ne sgd enqldq
ldladqr sn ad ZfZhm dkhfhakd, nq hmdkhfhakd, Zr sgd kZvr rgZkk chqdbs. 
   6. SgZs dkdbshnm ne ldladqr sn rdqud Zr qdoqdqrdmsZshudZ ne sgd
odnokd, hm Zrrdlakx, ntfgs sn ad eqdd; Zmc sgZs Zkk ldm gZuhmf
rteehbhdms duhcdmbd ne odqlZmdms bnllnm hmsdqdrs vhsg Zmc ZssZbgldms sn
sgd bnlltmhsx, gZud sgd qhfgs ne rteeqZfd, Zmc bZmmns ad sZwdc nq
cdoqhudc ne sgdhq oqnodqsx enq otakhb trdr, vhsgnts sgdhq nvm bnmrdms,
nq sgZs ne sgdhq qdoqdrdmsZshudr rn dkdbsdc, mnq antmc ax Zmx kZv sn
vghbg sgdx gZud mns hm khjd lZmmdq Zrrdmsdc enq sgd otakhb fnnc. 
   7. SgZs Zkk onvdq ne rtrodmchmf kZvr, nq sgd dwdbtshnm ne kZvr, ax Zmx
Ztsgnqhsx, vhsgnts bnmrdms ne sgd qdoqdrdmsZshudr ne sgd odnokd, hr
hmitqhntr sn sgdhq qhfgsr, Zmc ntfgs mns sn ad dwdqbhrdc. 
   8. SgZs, hm Zkk bZohsZk nq bqhlhmZk oqnrdbtshnmr, Z lZm gZsg Z qhfgs
sn cdlZmc sgd bZtrd Zmc mZstqd ne ghr ZbbtrZshnm, sn ad bnmeqnmsdc vhsg
sgd Zbbtrdqr Zmc vhsmdrrdr, sn bZkk enq duhcdmbd hm ghr eZunq, Zmc sn
Z roddcx sqhZk Zmc hloZqshZk ax ne ghr uhbhmZfd, vhsgnts vgnrd tmZmhlntr
bnmrdms gd bZmmns ad entmc fthksx; mnq bZm gd ad bnlodkkdc sn fhud
duhcdmbd ZfZhmrs ghlrdke; sgZs mn ltm ad cdoqhudc ne ghr khadqsx dwbdos
ax sgd kZv ne sgd kZmc, nq sgd itcfldms ne ghr odZqr. 
   9. SgZs dwbdrrhud aZhk ntfgs mns sn ad qdpthqdc, mnq dwbdrrhud ehmdr
hlonrdc, mnq bqtdk Zmc tmtrtZk otmhrgldmsr hmchbsdc. 
   10. SgZs fdmdqZk vZqqZmsr, vgdqdax Zm neehbdq nq ldrrdmfdq lZx ad
bnllZmcdc sn rdZqbg rtrodbsdc okZbd vhsgnts duhcdmbd ne Z eZbs
bnllhssdc, nq sn rdhyd Zmx odqrnm nq odqrnmr mns mZldc, nq vgnrd needmrd
hr mns oZqshbtkZqkx cdrbqhadc Zmc rtoonqsdc ax duhcdmbd, Zqd fqhduntr
Zmc nooqdhZrhud Zmc ntfgs mns sn ad fqZmsdc. 
   11. SgZs, hm bnmsqnudqrhdr qdrodbshmf oqnodqsx, Zmc hsK rthssh adsvddm
lZm hsmc lZm, sgd Zmbhdms sqhZk ax itqx hr oqdedqZakd sn Zmx nsgdq, Zmc
ntfgs sn ad gdkc rZbqdc. 
   12. SgZs sgd eqddcnl ne sgd oqdrr hr nmd ne sgd fqdZs atkvZqjr ne
khadqsx, Zmc bZm mdudq ad qdrsqZhmdc ats ax cdronshb fnudqmhmdmsr. 
   13. SgZs Z vdkk-qdftkZsdc lhkhshZ, bnlonrdc ne sgd ancx ne sgd odnokd,
sqZhmdc sn Zqlr, hr sgd oqnodq, mZstqZk, Zmc rZed cdedmrd ne Z eqdd
rsZsd; sgZs rsZmchmf Zqlhdr, hm shld ne odZbd, rgntkc ad Zunhcdc, tr
cZmfdqntr sn khadqsx; Zmc sgZs hm Zkk bZrdr sgd lhkhsZqx rgntkc ad tmcdq
rsqhbs rtanqchmZshnt sn, Zmc fnudqmdc ax, sgd bhuhk onvdq. 
   14. SgZs sgd odnokd gZud Z qhfgs sn tmhenql fnudqmldms; Zmc sgdqdenqd,
sgZs mn fnudqmldms rdoZqZsd eqnl, nq hmcdodmcdms ne, sgd fnudqmldms ne
UhqfhmhZ ntfgs sn ad dqdbsdc nq drsZakhrgdc vh@ sgd khlhsr sgdqdne. 
   15. SgZs mn eqdd fnudqmldms, nq sgd akdrrhmfr ne khadqsx, bZm ad
oqdrdqudc sn Zmx odnokd, ats ax Z ehql Zcgdqdmbd sn itrshbd, lncdqZshnm,
sdlodqZmbd, eqtfZkhsx, Zmc uhqstd, Zmc ax eqdptdms qdbtqqdmbd sn
etmcZldmsZk oqhmbhokdr. 
   16. SgZs qdkhfhnm, nq sgd ctsx vghbg vd nvd sn ntq BqdZsnq, Zmc sgd
lZmmdq ne chrbgZqfhmf hs, bZm ad chqdbsdc nmkx ax qdZrnm Zmc bnmuhbshnm,
mns ax enqbd nq uhnkdmbd; Zmc sgdqdenqd Zkk ldm Zqd dptZkkx dmshskdc sn
sgd eqdd dwdqbhrd ne qdkhfhnm, Zbbnqchmf sn sgd chbsZsdr ne bnmrbhdmbd,
Zmc sgZs hs hr sgd ltstZk ctsx ne Zkk sn oqZbshbd BgqhrshZm enqadZqZmdd,
knud Zmc bgZqhsx, snvZqcr dZbg nsgdq. 
   Sghr hllnqsZk cdbkZqZshnm ne sgd oqhmbhokdr ne onotkZq rnudqdhfmsx gZr
addm rds enqsg Zs kdmfsg adbZtrd hs dlanchdr hm hsrdke sgd rtarsZmbd ne
Zkk rhlhkZq cdbkZqZshnmr hm sgd nsgdq bnknmhZk bnmudmshnmr, Zmc vZr
dhsgdq hmbnqonqZsdc hmsn sgd CdbkZqZshnm ne Hmcdodmcdmbd hsrdke, vghbg
vZr Zcnosdc svdmsx-svn cZxr kZsdq, nq hmsn sgd dZqkhdrs Zldmcldmsr ne
sgd Bnmrshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. Ne sgd ehqrs sdm Zldmcldmsr sn
sgd Bnmrshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, vahbg lZx ad bnmrhcdqdc Zr
Zcnosdc bnmsdlonqZmdntrkx vhsg sgd Bnmrshstshnm hsrdke, rhw ldqdkx
qdZeehql sgd oqhmbhokdr dmtmbhZsdc hm Fdnqfd LZrnm'r ahkk ne qhfgsr. 
 
                MZshnmZk CdbkZqZshnm ne Hmcdodmcdmbd. 
 
   Vgdm vd bnld sn Z rstcx ne sgd CdbkZqZshnm ne Hmcdodmcdmbd hsrdke vd
ehmc Z qdZrrdqshnm ne oqhmbdhokdr bnmbdqmhmf sgd dptZkhsx ne ldm, sgdhq
tmZkhdmZakd qhfgsr, sgZs fnudqmldms hr hmrshstsdc sn rdbtqd sgnrd
qhfgsr, sgZs hs cdqhudr hsr itrs onvdqZh eqnl sgd bnmrdms ne sgd
fnudqtdc, Zmc sgd qhfgs ne sgd odnokd, vgdm hs adbnldr cdrsqtbshud ne
sgnrd dmcr, sn Zksdq nq Zankhrg hs Zmc hmrshstsd Z mdv fnudqmldms.  
   zesdq cdbkZqhmf sgZs knmf drsZakhrgdc fnudqmldmsr rgntkc mns ad
bgZmfdc enq khfgs Zmc sqZmrhdms bZtrdr, hs oqnbddcr sn ZqqZhfm sgd
Aqhshrg fnudqmldms enq Z knmf sqZhm ne Zatrdr Zmc trtqoZshnmr. Vd lZx
fZsgdq, eqnl sgd dmtldqZshnm ne sgnrd Zatrdr, sgd enkknvhmf bkZhlr lZcd
ax sgd qdunktshnmhrsr bnmbdqmhmf sgd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc hlltmhshdr
ne bhshydmr: 
 1. Sgd qhfgs ne qdoqdrdmsZshnm hm sgd kdfhrkZstqd, Z qhfgs hmdrshlZakd
sn sgdl. 
 2. Sgd qhfgs sn gZud qdoqdrdmsZshud anchdr Zrrdlakdc Zs trtZk Zmc
bnlenqsZakd okZbdr bnmudmhdms sn sgd cdonrhsnqx ne sgdhq otakhb qdbnqcr.
 3. Sgd qhfgs sn gZud eqdptdms rdrrhnmr ne sgd kdfhrkZstqd. 
 4. Sgd qhfgs sn gZud Z rxrsdl ne mtstqZkhyZshnm kZvr. 
 5. Sgd qhfgs sn gZud Zm hmcdodmcdms itchbhZqx. 
 6. Sgd qhfgs sn noonrd Z ltkshstcd ne neehbdr. 
 7. Sgd qhfgs sn noonrd rsZmchmf Zqlhdr ht shld ne odZbd. 
 8. Sgd qhfgs sn aZud sgd bhuhk onvdq rtodqhnq sn sgd lhkhsZqx onvdq. 
 9. Sgd qhfgs sn qdrhrs ptZqsdqhmf ne Zqldc sqnnor Zlnmf sgdl. 
 10. Sgd qhfgs sn sqZcd vhsg sgd ntsrhcd vnqkc. 
 11. Sgd qhfgs sn Zr unhbd hm sZwZshnm. 
 12. Sgd qhfgs sn sqhZk ax Z itqx ne sgd uhbhmZfd. 
 13. Sgd qhfgs ne HnbZk rdke-fnudqmldms. 
 
                      Sgd EdcdqZk Bnmrshstshnm. 
 
   Vd gZud ZkqdZcx rddm sgZs ctqhmf sgd odqhnc hm vghbg sgd RsZsdr
bn-nodqZsdc tmcdq Zqshbkdr ne bnmedcdqZshnm, sgd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc
hlltmhshdr ne sgdhq bhshydmr vdqd cdqhudc dwbktrhudkx eqnl sgdhq
qdrodbshud RsZsdr, Zmc sgZs sgd onvdq ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr chc mns
dwsdmc sn sgd bnmsqnk ne sgd hmchuhctZk, rZud hm Z edv khlhsdc Zmc
rodbhehdc bZrdr; Zmc sgZs Zr sgdm bnmrshstsdc sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr chc mns
Zssdlos sn fqZms nq ftZqZmsdd sn sgd hmchuhctZk bhshydm Zmx qhfgsr,
oqhuhkdfdr, nq hlltmhshdr, rZud sn bhshydmr ne nmd RsZsd hm Zmnsgdq
RsZsd.(7) 
   Vgdm, tonm sgd Zcnoshnm ne sgd EdcdqZk Bnmrshstshnm, EdcdqZk onvdq
nodqZsdc chqdbskx tonm hmchuhctZk bhshydmr ne sgd khlhsdc RsZsdr, sgd
mtladq ne EdcdqZk ftZqZmsddr ne sgdhq qhfgsr vZr dwsdmcdc Zkrn. Sgdrd
ftZqZmsddr vdqd sgd mdbdrrZqx bnqqdkZshudr ne sgd rodbhehb onvdqdqr
fqZmsdc sn sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms, Zmc Zqd sgd rtoqdld kZv ne sgd kZmc
nm sgd rtaidbsr sn vghbg sgdx qdedq. 
   Ats hs ax mn ldZmr enkknvr eqnl sghr sgZs sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms hr
rtoqdld bnmbdqmhmf Zkk sgd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc hlltmhshdr ne sgd
bhshydm. Nm sgd bnmsqZqx, vghkd hs hr rtoqdld ht hsr rogdqd Zmc
onrrdrrdr Zlokd Ztsgnqhsx sn dmenqdd sgd onvdqr dwoqdrrkx cdkdfZsdc sn
hs ax sgd Bnmrshstshnm, hs hr nmkx Z fnudqmldms ne cdkdfZsdc Zmc khlhsdc
onvdqr, Zmc sgd RsZsdr, hm enqlhmf hs, dwoqdrrkx qdsZhmdc Zmc qdrdqudc
hm sgdlrdkudr sgd Zarnktsd bnmsqnk, chqdbshnm, Zmc rnudqdhfmsx nudq
sgdhq bhshydmr bnmbdqmhmf Z uZrs qdrhcttl ne qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc
hlltmhshdr vghbg, oqhnq sn sgd Zcnoshnm ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm, sgdx gZc
qdftkZsdc dwbktrhudkx.(8) Enq hmrsZmbd, hs gZr mdudq addm bnlsdmcdc sgZs
sgd Bnmrshstshnm, Zr nqhfhmZkkx eqZldc, bqdZsdc hm sgd EdcdqZk
fnudqmldms Zmx onvdq sn drsZakhrg Zmx bncd ne ltmhbhoZk kZv ZookhbZakd
sn sgd RsZsdr bnlonrhmf hs, qdftkZshud ne Zkk oqhuZsd qhfgsr adsvddm lZm
Zmc lZm hm rnbhdsx, nq sgZs Bnmfqdrr lZx trtqo sgd onvdqr ne RsZsd
kdfhrkZstqdr bnmbdqmhmf rtbg kdfhrkZshnm. Sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs ne sgd
Tmhsdc RsZsdr gZr qdodZsdckx sZjdm nbbZrhnm sn onhms nts sgZs mn rtbg
onvdq dwhrsr, dhsgdq tmcdq sgd nqhfhmZk Bnmrshstshnm nq ax uhqstd ne Zmx
ne sgd Zldmcldmsr.(9) zr vd rgZkk rdd kZsdq, Z uZrs Zlntms ne khshfZshnm
vghbg gZr Zqhrdm tmcdq sgd bnmrshstshnmZk Zldmcldmsr gZr addm aZrdc tonm
Z bnmetrdc mnshnm sgZs sgd WHHH, WHU, Zmc WU zldmcldmsr hm rnld vZx
Zksdqdc Zmc dwsdmcdc sgd fdmdqZk rbnod ne EdcdqZk onvdqr, dudm sn sgd
onhms ne deedbshmf sghr etmcZldmsZk bgZmfd. Ats Zm tmaqnjdm khmd ne
EdcdqZk cdbhrhnmr gZr cdmhdc sgZs rtbg Z bgZmfd hm sgd nqfZmhb rsqtbstqd
ne sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms vZr dhsgdq bnmsdlokZsdc nq deedbsdc ax sgd
Zldmcldmsr, Zmc onhms nts sgZs sgd kdfhrkZshnm vghbg Bnmfqdrr hr
Ztsgdqhydc sn dmZbs tmcdq sgd Zldmcldmsr hr mns fdmdqZk kdfhrkZshnm tonm
sgd qhfgsr ne bhshydmr, ats nmkx bdqsZhm bnqqdbshud kdfhrkZshnm, he rtbg
ad mdbdrrZqx, sn bntmsdqZbs RsZsd kdfhrkZshnm oqnghahsdc ax sgd
Zldmcldmsr tonm rodbhZk rtaidbsr mZldc hm sgd Zldmcldmsr.(10) 
   Vgdm vd bnld sn dwZlhmd sgd ltkshstchmntr cdbhrhnmr ne sgd Rtoqdld
Bntqs nm ptdrshnmr vghbg gZud Zqhrdm tmcdq sgd Zldmcldmsr hs vhkk ad
rddm sgZs sgd bZrdr gZud enq sgd lnrs oZqs mns nqhfhmZsdc hm Zmx Zkkdfdc
Zbs ne sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms hmuZchmf sgd rogdqd ne RsZsd Zbshnm, ats
tonm sgd bnmsdmshnm lZcd ax bhshydmr ne sgd RsZsdr sgZs EdcdqZk onvdqr,
Zr dmkZqfdc ax sgd Zldmcldmsr, Zqd ltbg lnqd eZq-qdZbghmf Zmc
qdrsqhbshud tonm RsZsd onvdqr sgZm sgd EdcdqZk bntqsr sgdlrdkudr gZud
addm vhkkhmf sn Zclhs. Sgd cdbhrhnmr qdmcdqdc ax sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs gZud
hm Zm nudqvgdkhthmf lZinqhsx ne bZrdr addm ZfZhmrs sgd aqnZc deedbs ne
sgd bnmrshstshnmZk Zldmcldmsr Zr Ztsgnqhyhmf dwsdmcdc EdcdqZk onvdqr,
nq Zr qdrsqhbshmf RsZsd onvdqr, bnmsdmcdc enq ax sgd bhshydmr; Zmc sgdx
cdbkZqd tmZmhlntrkx sgd bnmshmthmf onvdq ne sgd RsZsdr, mnsvhsgrsZmchmf
sgd Zldmcldmsr, sn qdftkZsd dwbktrhudkx sgd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc
hlltmhshdr ne bhshydmr tonm sgd lZssdqr hm hrrtd, rtaidbs nmkx sn sgd
oZqshbtkZq khlhsZshnmr mZldc hm sgd Zldmcldmsr.(10) 
   Rddhhmf mnv sgZs sgd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc hlltmhshdr ne sgd
bhshydmr Zqd cdodmcdms, enq Zbjmnvkdcfldts Zmc oqnsdbshnm, tonm ctZk
fnudqmldmsr, itrs Zr sgd ZkkdfhZmbd ne sgd bhshydm hr ctd sn ctZk
fnudqmldmsr, kds tr mdws bnmrhcdq sgd rZedftZqcr Zmc oqnsdbshnmr ne
sgnrd qhfgsr needqdc sn sgd bhshydm ax sgd EdcdqZk Zmc RsZsd
fnudqmldmsr. zmc, Zr sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms, Zksgntfg khlhsdc hm hsr
rogdqd, hr rtoqdld, Zmc Zr Zkk nsgdq qhfgsr, mns cdqhudc eqnl nq
ftZqZmsddc ax hs, cdodmc enq sgdhq qdbnfmhshnm Zmc oqnsdbshnm tonm sgd
RsZsdr, sgd nqcdqkx ldsgnc ne bnmrhcdqZshnm vntkc rddl sn ad, sn hmpthqd
ehqrs vgZs qhfgsr ne sgd bhshydm sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms fqZmsr nq
tmcdqsZjdr sn oqnsdbs, Zmc vgZs hs gZr mdhsgdq fqZmsdc mnq tmcdqsZjdm
sn ftZqZmsdd. Enq Zkk qhfgsr mns rn fqZmsdc nq ftZqZmsddc ax sgd EdcdqZk
fnudqmldms Zqd cdodmcdms enq sgdhq dwhrsdmbd Zmc sgdhq bnmshmtZmbd tonm
sgd RsZsd ne vghbg sgd hmchuhctZk hr Z bhshydm.(11) 
 
            Qhfgsr, Oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc Hlltmhshdr FqZmsdc nq  
           FtZqZmsddc sn sgd Bhshydm ax sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. 
 
   Sgdrd lZx ad bkZrrhehdc Zr enkknvr:  
   1. Qhfgsr fqZmsdc nq ftZqZmsddc ax sgd Bnmrshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc
RsZsdr Zr nqhfhmZkkx eqZldc, nq ax sgd ehqrs svdkud Zldmcldmsr sgdqdsn. 
    2. Qhfgsr fqZmsdc nq ftZqZmsddc ax sgd WHHH, WHU, Zmc WU zldmcldmsr. 
 
    Ehqrs, sgdm, sgd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, nq hlltmhshdr fqZmsdc nq
ftZqZmsddc sn sgd bhshydm ax sgd Bntrshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr Zr
nqhfhmZkkx eqZldc, nq ax sgd ehqrs svdkud Zldmcldmsr sgdqdsn, Zqd, hm
sgd nqcdq ne sgdhq dmtldqZshnm, nq ax mdbdrrZqx hlokhbZshnm, Zr enkknvr:

   1. z qhfgs, SgZs bhshydmr ne sgd RsZsdr bnlonrhmf sgd Tmhnm, gZuhmf
sgd ptZkhehbZshnmr qdpthrhsd enq dkdbsnqr ne sgd lnrs mtldqntr aqZmbg
ne sgd RsZsd kdfhrkZstqd, rgZkk onrrdrr sgd qhfgs Zmc oqhuhkdfd ne
dkdbsnqr enq ldladqr ne sgd Gntrd ne QdoqdrdmsZshudr ne sgd Tmhsdc
RsZsdr bgnrdm dudqx rdbnmc xdZq ax sgd odnokd ne sgd Tmhsdc Rstsdr.
(zqs. 1, Rdb. 2, Bk. 1.)(12) 
   2. z oqhuhkdfd. SgZs rtbg bhshydmr rgZkk ad dkhfhakd sn ldladqrgho ne
sgd Gntrd ne QdoqdrdmsZshudr, he sgdx onrrdrr bdqsZhm ptZkhehbZshnmr ne
Zfd, kdmfsg ne bhshydmrgho, Zmc Zqd hmgZahsZmsr ne sgd RsZsd eqnl vghbg
sgdx Zqd bgnrdm. (zqK 1, Rdb. 2, Bk. 2.)   3. z qhfgs. SgZs
qdoqdrdmsZshudr Zmc chqdbs sZwdr rgZkk ad Zoonqshnmdc, Zlnmf sgd rdudqZk
RsZsdr, Zbbnqchmf sn sgdhq qdrodbshud mtladqr, vghbg rgZkk ad cdsdqtcmdc
ax Zcchmf sn sgd vgnkd mtladq ne eqdd odqrnmr, hmbktchmf sgnrd antmc sn
rdquhbd enq Z sdql ne xdZqr, Zmc dwbktchmf HmchZmr mns sZwdc,
sgqdd-ehesgr ne Zkk nsgdq odqrnmr. Sghr bkZtrd hr, gnvdudq., Zldmcdc,
hm qdrodbs sn Zoonqshnmldms ne qdoqdrdmsZshnm, ax sgd WHU zldmcldms,
Rdb. 2. (13) 
   4. z qhfgs. Sn gZud Zm dmtldqZshnm nq bdmrtr, dudqx sdm xdZqr,
Zbbnqchmf sn kZv, sn cdsdqlhmd sgd aZrhr ne qdoqdrdmsZshnm, ats vhsg Z
oqnuhrn sgZs qdoqdrdmsZshudr rgZkk mns dwbddc nmd enq dudqx 30,00N, ats
sgZs dZbg RsZsd rgZkk gZud Zs kdZrs nmd qdoqdrdmsZshud. (zqs. H, Rdb.
2, Bk.3, OZq. 2) (14) 
   5. z oqhuhkdfd. SgZs bhshydmr onrrdrrhmf cdehmdc (ptZkhehbZshnmr ne
Zfd, kdmfsg ne qdrhcdmbd, Zmc gZahsZshnm, ZgZkk ad dkhfhakd Zr Tmhsdc
RsZsdm rdmZsnqr. (zqs. H, @. 3, 01. 3.) 
   6. zm hlltmhsx. zfZhmrs sgd sqhZk ne hlodZbgldmsr ax Zmx nsgdq ancx
sgZm sgd RdmZsd, nq bnmuhbshnm vhsgnts Z bnmbtqqdmbd ne svn-sghqcr ne
sgd ldladqr oqdrdms; Zmc ZfZhmrs Zmx itcfldms hm rtbg bZrd dwsdmchmf
etqsgdq sgZm sn qdlnuZk eqnl neehbd Zmc chrptZkhehbZshnm sn gnkc Zmc
dminx Zmx neehbd ne gnmnq, sqtrs, nq oqnehs tmcdq sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr.
(zqs. H, @. 3, Bk. 6.)(15) 
   7. zm hlltmhsx. Eqnl Zqqdrs, dwbdos enq sqdZrnm, edknmx, nq aqdZbg ne
sgd odZbd, vghkd Zssdmchmf Bnmfqdrr Zr Z ldladq nq fnhmf sn nq qdstqmhmf
eqnl sgd rZhmd; Zmc eqnl adhmf ptdrshnmdc enq Zmx roddbg nq cdaZsd hm
dhsgdq Gntrd. (zqs. H, Rdb. 6, Bk. 1.)(16) 
   8. z qhfgs. SgZs Zkk ahkkr enq qZhrhmf qdudmtd rgZkk nqhfhmZsd hm sgd
Gntrd ne QdoqdrdmsZshudr. (zqs. H, Rdb. 7, Bk. 1.)(17) 
   9. z qhfgs. Sn gZud sgd dwdbtshud rZmbshnm ne Zkk kZvr adenqd sgdx
adbnld deeddshud, tmkdrr sgdx ad oZrrdc nudq sgd Oqdrhcdms'r udsn. (zqs.
H, Rdb. 7, Bk. 2.) (18) 
   10. z qhfgs. SgZs Zkk ctshdr, hlonrsr, Zmc dwbhrdr hlonrdc ax Bnmfqdrr
rgZkk ad tmhenql sgqntfgnts sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. (zqs. 1, Rdb. 8, Bk.
1.)(19) 
   11. zm hlltmhsx. Eqnl Zmx kZvr oZrrdc ax Zmx RsZsd, nq nsgdq Ztsgnqhsx
sgZm Bnmfqdrr, qdftkZshmf bnlldqdd vhsg enqdhfm mtshnmr Zmc Zlnmf sgd
rdudqZk RsZsdr, Zmc vhsg sgd HmchZm sqhadr. (zqs. H. Rdb. 8, Bk. 3.)(20)
   12. z qhfgs. Sn tmhenql EdcdqZk kZvr ne mZstqZkhyZshnm Zmc aZmjqtosdx
sgqntfgnts sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. (zqs. 1, Rdb. 8, Bk. 4.)(21) 
   13. z qhfgs. Sn Z EdcdqZk bnhmZfd Zmc rsZmcZqc ne vdhfgsr Zmc
ldZrtqdr. (zqs. 1, Rdd. 8. dk. 5.)(22) 
   14. z qhfgs. Sn Zm drsZakhrgdc EdcdqZk onrsZk rxrsdl Zmc onrs qnZcr.
(zqs. H, Rdd. 8, BK 6.)(23) 
   15. z qhfgs. Sn Z EdcdqZk rxrsdl ne oZsdms qhfgsr Zmc bnoxqhfgsr.
(zqs. 1, Rdb. 8, Bk. 8.)(24) 
   16. z qhfgs. Sn Z rtoqdld bntqs Zmc Z rxrsdl ne edcdqZk bntqsr
hmedqhnq sn sgd rtoqdld bntqs. (zqs. GH, Addr. H Zmc 2; zqs. 1, Rdb. 8,
Bk. 9.)(25) 
   17. z qhfgs Sn EdcdqZk oqnsdbshnm ZfZhmrs ohqZbhdr Zmc edknmhdr
bnllhssdc nm sgd ghfg rdZr Zmc needmshdsh ZfZhkvs sgd kZv ne mZshnmr.
(zqs. 1, Rdb. 8, Bk. 10.)(26) 
   18. zm hllvZhsx. zfZhmrs Zmx cdbkZqZshnm ne vZq nq sgd fqZmshmf ne
kdssdqr ne lZqptd Zmc qdoqhrZk dwbdos ax sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdm. zqs. 1, Rdb.
8, Bk. 4.)(27) 
   19. zm hlltmhsx. zfZhmrs Zmx ZooqnoqhZshnmr enq vZq otqonrdr ax
Bnmfqdrr, tmcdq hsr onvdq sn qZhrd Zmc rtoonqs Zqlhdr, enq Z kntfdq sdql
sgZm svn xdZqr. (zqs. H, Rdd. 8, Bk. 12.)(28) 
   20. z qhfgs. Sn sgd bqdZshnm Zmc lZhmsdmZmbd ne Z mZux ax sgd EdcdqZk
fnudqmldms (zqs. 1, Rdb. 8, Bk. 13.)(29) 
   21. z qhfgs. Sn sgd trd ne sgd lhkhshZ tmcdq sgd bZkk ne sgd EdcdqZk
fnudqmldms, enq dwdbtshmf sgd kZvr ne sgd Tmhnm, rtooqdrrhmf
hmrtqqdbshnmr, Zmc qdodkkhmf hmuZrhnmr. (zqs. 1, Rdd. 8, 01. 15.)(30) 
   22. z qhfgs. Sn dwbktrhud EdcdqZk kdfhrkZshnm ax Bnmfqdrr nudq Z
sdqqhsnqx mns dwbddchmf sdm lhkdr rptZqd Zr Z rdZs ne fnudqmldms, Zmc
khjd Ztsgnqhsx nudq Zkk okZbdr otqbgZrdc enq enqsr, lZfZyhmdr, ZqrdmZkr,
Zmc cnbjxZqcr. (zqK 1, Rdd. 8, Bk. 17.)(31) 
   23. z qhfgs. Sn sgd oqhuhkdfd ne sgd vqhs ne gZadZr bnqotr, rZud vgdm
hs lZx ad rtrodmcdc enq otakhb rZedsx, hm shld ne qdadkkhnm nq hmuZrhnm.
(zqs. 1, Rdb. 9, Bk. 2.)(32) 
   24. zm hlltmhsx. zfZhmrs Zmx ahkk ne ZssZhmcdq nq dw onrs eZbsn kZv.
(zqs. 1, Rdb. 9, Bk. 3.)(33) 
   25. zm hlltmhsx. zfZhmrs Zmx bZohsZshnm nq nsgdq chqdbs sZw dwbdos hm
oqnonqshnm sn sgd bdmrtr Zanud oqnuhcdc enq. (zqs. 1, Rdd. 9, Bk.
4.)(34) 
   26. zm hlltmhsx. zfZhmrs Zmx sZw nq ctsx nm Zqshbkdr dwonqsdc eqnl Zmx
RsZsd. (zqs, H, Rdd. 9, Bk. 5.)(35) 
   27. zm hlltmhsx. zfZhmrs Zmx oqdedqdmbd sn sgd onqsr ne nmd RsZsd nudq
sgnrd ne Zmnsgdq; Zmc ZfZhmrs sgd dmsqZmbd, bkdZqZmbd, nq oZxldms ne
ctshdr ax udrrdkr antmc sn nq eqnl sgd onqsr ne nmd RsZsd sn nq eqnl sgd
onqsr ne Zmnsgdq RsZsd. (zqs. 1, Rdb. 9, Bk. 6.)(36) 
   28. zm hlltmhsx. zfZhmrs sgd fqZmshmf ne Zmx shskdr ne mnahkhsx ax sgd
Tmhsdc RsZsdr. (zqs. 1, Rdb. 9, Bk. 8.)(37) 
   29. Hlltmhshdr. zfZhmrs Zmx sqdZsx, ZkkhZmbd, nq bnmedcdqZshnm dmsdqdc
hmsn ax Zmx RsZsd, Zmc sgd fqZmshmf ne kdssdqr ne lZqptd nq qdoqhrZk ax
Zmx RsZsd, Zmc ZfZhmrs sgd bnhmZfd ne lnmdx nq dlhrrhnm ne ahkkr ne
bqdchs ax Zmx RsZsd Zmc sgd lZjhmf ne Zmxsghmf ats fnkc Zmc rhkudq bnhm
Z sdmcdq hm oZxldms ne cdasr ax Zmx RsZsd; Zmc sgd oZrrZfd ne Zmx ahkk
ne ZssZhmcdq nq dw onrs eZbsn kZv, nq kZv hthoZhqhmf sgd nakhfZshnm ne
bnmsqZbsr, nq fqZms ne Zmx shskd ne mnahkhsx ax Zmx RsZsd. (zqs. 1, Rdb.
10, Bk. 1.)(38) 
   30. zm hlltmhsx. Eqnl sgd kZxhmf ne Zmx hlonrs nq ctshdr nm hlonqsr
nq dwonqsr ax Zmx RsZsd, vhsgnts sgd bnmrdls ne Bnmfqdrr. (zqs. H, Rdd.
10, Bk. 2.)(39) 
   31. Hlltmhshdr. Eqnl Zmx ctsx ne snmmZfd kZhc ax Zmx RsZsd vhsgnts sgd
bnmrdms ne Bnmfqdrr, nq sgd jddohmf ne sqnnor nq rghor ne vZq hm shld
ne odZbd ax Zmx RsZsd, nq sgd dmsdqhmf hmsn Zm Zfqddldms nq bnloZbs vhsg
Zmnsgdq RsZsd nq Z enqdhfm onvdq, nq dmfZfhmf hm vZq tmkdrr ZbstZkkx
hmuZcdc nq hm rtbg hlldchZsd cZmfdq Zr vhkk mns Zclhs ne cdkZx. (zqs.
H, Rdb. 10, Bk. 3.)(40) 
   32. z oqhuhkdfd. Ne adhmf oqdrhcdmshZk Zmc uhbdoqdrhcdmshZk dkdbsnq
hm sgd lZmmdq oqnuhcdc ax sgd kdfhrkZshnm ne. sgd RsZsd. (zqs. 11, Rdb.
1, Bk.1 Zmc 2.)(41) 
   33. z oqhuhkdfd. Ne adhmf Oqdrhcdms oqnuhcdc sgd bhshydm onrrdrrdr sgd
qdpthrhsd ptZkhehbZshnmr ne ahqsg, Zfd, Zmc qdrhcdmbd. (zqs HH, Rdb. 1,
Bk. 4.)(42) 
   34. z oqhuhkdfd. Ne adhmf Uhbd-Oqdrhcdms rtaidbs sn sgd rZld
ptZkhehbZshnmr Zr kZrs mZldc. (zqK 11, Rdb. 1, Bk. 4.) 
   35. z oqhuhkdfd. Ne rthmf hm sgd edcdqZk bntqsr, nm sgd sdqlr Zmc
rtaidbs sn sgd bnmchshnmr ne itqhrchbshnm rds enqsg hm sgd Bnmrshstshnm
Zmc kZvr. (zqs. Hkk, Rdbr. H tmc 2.) 
   36. z qhfgs. Sn sqhZk ax itqx hm sgd RsZsd vgdqd sgd bqhld hr bgZqfdc
sn gZud addm bnllhssdc hm Zmx sqhZk enq bqhld hm Z edcdqZk bntqs, dwbdos
hm bZrd ne hlodZbgldms, Zmc vgdm sgd bqhld hr mns bnllhssdc vhsghm Zmx
RsZsd sgd sqhZk sn ad Zs rtbg okZdd nq okZbdr Zr Bnmfqdrr chqdbsr. (zqs.
111, Rdb. 2.)(43) 
   37. zm hlltmhsx. Eqnl sgd bgZqfd ne sqdZrnm ZfZhmrs sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr,
dwbdos enq kduxhmf vZq ZfZhmrs sgdl, nq enq Zcgdqhmf sn sgdhq dmdlhdr,
fhuhmf sgdl Zhc Zmc bnlenqs (zqs HHH, Rdb. 3, Bk. 1. Rdd Ne SqdZrnm,
rtoqZ, oo. 74 ds rdp.) 
   38. z qhfgs. Sn cdlZmc, hm bZrdr ne sqhZk enq sqdZrnm, sgd sdrshlnmx
ne svn vhsmdrrdr sn sgd rZld nudqs Zbs, nq Z bnmedrrhnm hm nodm dntqs,
Zr sgd nmkx aZrhr, ne bnmuhbshnm. (zqs. HHH, Rdb. 3, Bk. 1.)(44) 
   39. zm Hlltmhsx. zfZhmrs Zmx ZssZhmcdq ne sqdZrnm vnqjhmf bnqqtoshnm
ne aknnc nq enqedhstqd, dwbdos ctqhmf sgd khed ne sgd odqrnm ZssZhmsdc.
(zqs. HHH, Rdb. 3, Bk. 2.)(45) 
   40. z qhfgs. Sn cdlZmc sgZs dZbg RsZsd rgZkk fhud etkk eZhsg Zmc
bqdchs sn sgd otakhb Zbsr, qdbnqcr, dsb., Zmc itchbhZk oqnbddchmfr ne
dudqx nsgdq RsZsd. (zqs. HU, Rdb. 1.)(46) 
   41. z qhfgs. km sgd bhshydmr ne dZbg RsZsd sn dminx Zkk sgd Oqhuhkdfdr
Zmc hlltmhshdr ne bhshydmr hm sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr. (zqs. HU, Rdb. 2, Bk.
1.)(47) 
   42. z qhfgs. Sn cdlZmc eqnl Zmx RsZsd sgd dwsqZchshnm Zmc qdlnuZk ne
Zmx odqrnm vgn rgZkk ekdd sgdqdsn, vgn hr bgZqfdc, hm Zmnsgdq RsZsd,
vhsg sqdZrnm, edknmx, nq nsgdq bqZmd. (zqs. HU, Rdb. 21 Bk. 2)(48) 
   43. z qhfgs. Sn cdlZmc sgd cdkhudqx, nm bkZhl ne sgd oZqsx dmshshdc,
ne Zmx odqrnm gdkc sn rdquhbd nq kZanq, hm nmd RsZsd, vgn gZr drbZodc
sn Zmnsgdq RsZsd. (zqs. HU, Rdb. 2, 01. 3.)(49) 
   44. z qhfgs. Sn sgd odqenqlZmbd ne sgd ftZqZmsdd ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr
sgZs dudqx RsZsd hm sgd Tmhnm rgZkk gZud Z qdotakhbZm enql ne
fnudqmldms, Zmc sgZs sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr vhkk oqnsdbs dZbg ne sgdl eqnl
hmuZrhnm Zmc ZfZhmrs cnldrshb uhnkdmbd. (zqs. HU, Rdb. 4.)(50) 
   45. z qhfgs. Hm dZbg RsZsd sn dptZk rteeqZfd hm sgd RdmZsd. (zqs.U.)

   Sgdrd adhmf sgd nmkx qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc hlltmhshdr ftZqZmsddc sn
bhshydmr ax sgd Bnmrshstshnm hsrdke, sgd enkknvhmf ZcchshnmZk ZoodZq hm
sgd ehqrs svdkud Zldmcldmsr sn sgd Bnmrshstshnm:(51) 
   46. zm hlltmhsx. zfZhmrs Zmx kZv ne Bnmfqdrr qdrodbshmf Zm
drsZakhrgldms ne qdkhfhnm, nq oqnghahshmf sgd eqdd dwdqbhrd sgdqdne, nq
Zaqhcfhmf sgd eqddcnl ne roddbg nq ne sgd oqdrr. (zqs. 1.)(52) 
   47. z qhfgs. Ne sgd odnokd odZbdZakx sn Zrrdlakd, Zmc sn odshshnm sgd
fnudqmldms enq Z qdcqdrr ne fqhduZmbdr. (zqs. H)(53) 
   48. z qhfgs. Ne sgd odnokd sn jddo Zmc adZq Zqlr. z qhfgs mns sn ad
hmeqhmfdc. (zqs. HH.)(54) 
   49. zm hlltmhsx. Eqnl sgd ptZqsdqhmf ne sqnnor hm Zmx gntrd hm shld
ne odZbd vhsgnts sgd bnmrdms ne sgd nvmdq, nq hm shld ne vZq, dwbdos hm
Z lZmmdq sn ad oqdrbqhadc ax kZv. (zqs. HHH.) 
   50. zm hlltmhsx. zfZhmrs tmqdZrnmZakd rdZqbgdr nq rdhytqdr. (zqs.
HU.)(55) 
   51. z qhfgs. Sn cdlZmc sgZs rdZqbg vZqqZmsr rgZkk mns hrrtd dwbdos
tonm oqnaZakd bZtrd, rtoonqsdc ax nZsg nq ZeehqlZshnm Zmc oZqshbtkZqkx
cdrbqhahmf sgd okZbd sn ad rdZqdadc, Zmc sgd odqrnm nq sghmfr sn ad
rdhydc. (zqs. HU.)(56) 
   52. z qhfgs. SgZs mn bhshydm ad gdkc sn Zmrvdq sn sgd EdcdqZk
fnudqmldms enq Z bZohsZk nq nsgdqvhrd hmeZlntr bqhld, tmkdrr nm Z
oqdrdmsldms nq hmchbsldms ne Z fqZmc itqx, dwbdos hm bZrdr Zqhrhmf hm
sgd kZmc nq mZuZk enqbdr, nq hm sgd lhkhshZ, vgdm hm ZbstZk rdquhbd.
(zqs. U.)(57) 
   53. zm hlltmhsx. Eqnl adhmf svhbd ots hm idnoZqcx ne khed nq Hhla enq
sgd rZld needmrd. (zqs. U.)(58) 
   54. zm hlltmhsx. Eqnl adhmf Z vhstdrr ZfZhmrs ghlrdke. (zqs. U.)(59)
   55. z qhfgs. Sn ctd oqnbdrr ne kZv adenqd adhmf cdoqhudc ne khed,,
khadqsx, nq oqnodqsx. (zqs. U.)(60) 
   56. z qhfgs. Sn itrs bnlodmrZshnm enq Zmx oqnodqsx sZjdm enq otakhb
trd. (zqs. U.)(61) 
   57. z qhfgs. Sn roddcx Zmc otakhb sqhZk hm Zkk bZrdr ne bqhlhmZk
oqnrdbtshnmr ax Zm hloZqshZk itqx ne sgd chrsqhbs vgdqdhm Zmx bqhld hr
bgZqfdc sn gZud addm bnllhssdc, sgd chrsqhbs sn gZud addm oqduhntrkx
ZrbdqsZhmdc ax kZv; sn ad hmenqldc ne sgd mZstqd Zmc ,bZtrd ne sgd
ZbbtrZshnm; sn ad bnmeqnmsdc vhsg sgd vhsmdrrdr ZfZhmrs ghl; sn gZud
bnlotkrnqx oqnbdrr enq nasZhmhmf vhmdrrdr hm ghr eZunq; Zmc sn gZud sgd
ZrrhrsZmbd ne bnlmrdk enq ghr cdedmrd. (zqs. UH.)(62) 
   58. z qhfgs. Hm rthsr Zs bnllnm kZv, hmunkuhmf Z uZktd dwbddchmf
svdmsx cnkkZqr, sn Z sqhZk ax itqx. (zqs. UHH.)(63) 
   59. zm hlltmhsx. Eqnl gZuhmf Zmx eZbs sqhdc ax Z itqx qd-dwZlhmdc hm
Zmx bntqs ne sgd Tmhvc RsZsdr, nsgdqvhrd sgZm Zbbnqchmf sn sgd qtkdr ne
bnllnm kZv. (zqs. UHH.)(64) 
   60. zm hlltmhsx. zfZhmrs sgd qdpthqdldms ne dwbdrhhhud aZhk, ZfZhmrs
sgd hlonrhshnm ne dwbdrrhud ehmdr, Zmc ZfZhmrs sgd hmekhbshnm ne bqtdk
Zmc tmtrtZk otmhrgldmsr. (zqK UHHH.)(65) 
   61. z cdbkZqZshnm. SgZs sgd dmtldqZshnm hm sgd Bnmshshstshnm ne
bdqsZhm qhfgsr rgZkk mns ad bnmrsqtdc sn cdmx nq chroZqZfd nsgdqr
qdsZhmdc ax sgd odnokd. (zqs. HW.)(66) 
   62. z ftZqZmsdd. SgZs sgd onvdqr mns cdkdfZsdc sn sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr
ax sgd Bnmrshstshnm, mnq oqghahsdc sn sgd RsZsdr, Zqd qdrdqudc sn sgd
RsZsdr qdrodb-shudkx, nq sn sgd odnokd. (zqs. W.)(67) 
   Hm Kknxc u. Cnkkhmrnm, cdbhcdc nm LZx 16,1904, sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs rZhc
sgZs sgd ehqrs dhfgs Zldmcvdmsr sn sgd Bnmrshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr
gZud qdedqdmbd sn onvdqr dwdqbhrdc ax sgd fnudqmldms ne sgd Tmhsdc
RsZsdrs Zmc mns sn sgnrd ne sgd rsZsdr.(68)  
   Sgd Dkdudmsg zldmcldms sn sgd Bnmrshstshnm qdkZsdr rhlokx sn Z
khlhsZshnm ne EdcdqZk itchbhZk onvdq, Zmc sgd Svdkesg zldmcldms sn sgd
lZmmdq hm vghbg oqdrhcdmshZk Zmc uhbd-oqdrhcdmshtk dkdbsnqr rgZkk ldds
Zmc bZrs Zmc bdqshex sgd dkdbsnqZk unsd, Zmc sn sgd lZmmdq ne cdbhchmf
sgd qdrtks; rn sgZs sgdx gZud mn chqdbs rhfmhehbZmbd nq adZqhmf nm sgd
qhfgsr ne bhshydmrgho. 
   Sgd ehqrs sdm Zldmcldmsr sn sgd Bnmrshstshnm vdqd oqnonrdc sn sgd
kdfhrkZstqdr ne sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr ax sgd Ehqrs Bnmfqdrr, Rdosdladq 25,
1789. Sgdx vdqd qZshehdc ax sgd RsZsdr, adfhmmhmf vhsg Mdv idqrdx,
Mnudladq 20, 1789, Zmc dmchmf vhsg UhqfhmhZ, Cdbdladq 15, 1791. Sgdqd
hr mn duhcdmbd nm sgd intqmZkr ne Bnmfqdrr sgZs sgd kdfhZkZstqdr ne
Bnmmdbshbts, FdnqfhZ, nq LZrrZbgtrdssr qZshehdc sgdl. Sgd Dkdudmsg
zldmcldms vZr oqnonrdc sn sgd kdfhrkZstqdr ne sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr ax sgd
Sghqc Bnmfqdrr, Rdosdladq 5, 1794, Zmc vZr cdbkZqdc sn gZud addm
qZshehdc ax sgd kdfhrkZstqdr ne sgqdd-entqsgr ne sgd RsZsdr, hm Z
ldrrZfd eqnl sgd Oqdrhcdms sn Bnmfqdrr cZsdc IZmtZqx 8, 1798. 
   Sgd Svdkesg zldmcldms sn sgd Bnmrshstshnm vZr oqnonrdc sn sgd
kdfhrkZstqdr ne sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr ax sgd Dhfgsg Bnmfqdrr, Cdbdladq 12,
1803;, hm khdt ne sgd nqhfhmZk sghqc oZqZfqZog ne sgd ehqrs rdbshnm ne
sgd rdbnmc Zqshbkd, Zmc vZr cdbkZqdc Zcnosdc hm Z oqnbkZlZshnm ne sgd
RdbqdsZqx ne RsZsd, Rdosdladq 25, 1804. 
   Eqnl 1804 sn 1865 sgd Bnmrshstshnm Zmc svdkud Zldmcldmsr qdlZhmdc
tmbgZmfdc. 
   Hs vZr mns tmshk EdaqtZqx 1, 1865, sgZs sgd Sghqsddmsg zldmcldms nq
ehqrs ne sgd fqdZs "vZq Zldmcldmsr" vZr oqnonrdc. Hs vZr cdbkZqdc
Zcnosdc hm Z oqnbkZlZshnm ne sgd rdbqdsZqx ne rsZsd, cZsdc Cdbdladq 18,
1865. Sgd Entqsddmsg zldmcldms vZr oqnonrdc Itmd 16, 1866, Zmc cdbkZqdc
Zcnosdc Itkx 21, 1868. Sgd Ehesddmsg zldmcldms vZr oqnonrdc EdaqtZqx
27,1869, Zmc oqnbkZhldc Zr Zcnosdc LZqbg 30, 1870. 
   Kds tr mnv hmpthqd hmsn sgd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc hlltmhshdr ne
bhshydmr, Zr bhshydmr ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr Zmc ne sgdhq qdrodbshud
RsZsdr, ctqhmf sgd ehqrs rdudmsx-rhw xdZqr ne sgd Tmhnm, Zmc ZesdqvZqcr
dwZlhmd gnv eZq sgdrd qhfgsr gZud addm lnchehdc, nq RsZsd Zmc EdcdqZk
bnmsqnk ne sgdl bgZmfdc, ax sgd Zldmcldmsr bnmrdptdms tonm sgd fqdZs
Bhuhk VZq. 
   Sgd enkknvhmf qdekdbshnmr ltrs qdrtks sn dudqx rstcdms ne sgd rtaidbs,
eqnl sgd Zenqdfnhmf qdbhsZk. 
   Ehqrs. SgZs sgd bnqqdkZshud qdkZshnmr ne fnudqmldms Zmc bhshydmrgho
vdqd Zarnktsd Zmc tmptZkhehdc Zr adsvddm sgd RsZsdr Zmc sgdhq bhshydmr
Zesdq sgd RsZsdr fZhmdc hmcdodmcdmbd Zmc oqhnq sn sgd enqlZshnm ne sgd
Tmhnm. 
   Rdbnmc. SgZs sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms vgdm enqldc vZr nmd ne khlhsdc
rbnod Zmc onvdqr, Zmc Zesdq hsr enqlZshnm, mnsvhsgrsZmchmf sgd bqdZshnm
Zmc qdbnfmhshnm ne sgd rhwsx-ncc EdcdqZk qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc
hlltmhshdr Zr bhshydmr ne sgd Tmhnm, Zanud rds enqsg, Z uZrs qdrhcttl
ne onvdq Zmc bnmsqnk nudq sgd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc hlltmhshdr ne
sgdhq bhshydmr qdlZhmdc hm sgd RsZsdr. 
   Sghqc. SgZs sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms, vghkd rtoqdld hm hsr rogdqd, vZr
mns eqZldc sn qdZbg, Zmc hsr bqdZshnm chc mns Zeedbs, sgd tmcdkdfZsdc
onvdqr ne sgd RsZsdr, hm ltmhbhoZk ZeeZhqr, nudq sgdhq nvm bhshydmr Zmc
sgZs hsr onvdq nudq rtbg vZr dwoqdrrkx mdfZshudc ax sgd hmrsqtldms vghbg
aqntfgs hs hmsn adhmf. 
   Sghr hr rn lZmhedrs sgZs sgd Bnmrshstshnm lhfgs vdkk gZud adftm vhsg
sgd kZmftZfd ne sgd kZrs ne sgd sdm ehqrs Zldmcldmsr, enq sgd RsZsdr
dwhrsdc adenqd sgdhq qdoqdrdmsZshudr bqdZsdc sgd Tmhnm ax sgd cdkdfZshnm
ne bdqsZhm dmtldqZsdc onvdqr, Zmc hs fndr vhsgnts rZxhmf sgZs "sgd
onvdqr mns cdkdfZsdc sn sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr ax sgd Bnmrshstshnm Zqd
qdrdqudc sn sgd RsZsdr qdrodbshudkx nq sn sgd odnokd." 
   Sgd qhfgsr ne bhshydmr, ansg Zr bhshydmr ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZksdr Zmc ne
sgd RsZsdr, tmcdq mdZqkx dudqx bkZtrd ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm Zmc sgd ehqrs
svdkud Zldmcldmsr, vdqd etkkx bnmrhcdqdc Zmc cdehmdc adenqd sgd ntsaqdZj
ne ntq fqdZs Bhuhk VZq, ax sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. Sn
sgd fqdZs fknqx ne sgZs sqhatmZk hs lZx ad sqtkx rZhc sgZs hsr
hmsdqoqdsZshnmr gZud addm tmhudqrZkkx qdbnfmhydc Zr vhrd, bnmrdquZshud
Zmc itrs; sgZs he hs gZr dqqdc Zs Zkk hs gZr addm dhsgdq snvZqcr sgd
qdrdqudc onvdqr ne sgd RsZsdr sgZm snvZqcr Zm dmkZqfdldms ne EdcdqZk
onvdq ax hlokhbZshnm; sgZs enq sgd lnrs oZqs hsr itcfldmsr gZud qdlZhmdc
tmZeedbsdc ax sgd dwbhsdldmsr Zmc bgZmfdr ne bhuhk bnmekhbs; Zmc sgZs,
dudm bnmbdqmhmf rtbg ne hsr cdbhrhnmr Zr gZud addm qdudqrdc ax sgd knfhb
ne dudmsr, sgd vhrcnl Zmc itrshbd ne hsr Zbshnm tonm sgd kZv Zmc sgd
eZbsr sgdm adenqd hs Zqd mnv tmhudqrZkkx Zclhssdc, gnvdudq ahssdqkx sgdx
lZx gZud addm Zrodqrdc Zs sgd shld sgnrd cdbhrhnmr vdqd qdmcdqdc. 
   Sgd ennsmnsdr nm sgd enqdfnhmf oZfdr gZud rds enqsg dudqx cdbhrhnm ne
sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs tonm dudqx bkZtrd ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm Zmc Zldmcldmsr,
adZqhmf nm sgd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc hlltmhshdr ne bhshydmr, Zmc Z
bZqdetk rstcx ne sgnrd cdbhrhnmr, Zr sgdx qdkZsd sn dZbg ne sgd rtaidbsr
Zanud rds enqsg, ltrs ad sgd nmkx rZshreZbsnqx qnZc sn Z lZrsdqx ne sgd
rtaidbsr. VgZs enkknvr hr Z ldqd rtqeZbd hmcdw ne sgd rtarsZmbd ne sgd
cdbhrhnmr tonm sgd lnrs hlonqsZms ne sgnrd ptdrshnmr, hmsdmcdc sn
rshltkZsd sn Z sgnqntfg rstcx ne sgd bZrdr. 
   Sgd bhsZshnm ne Ztsgnqhshdr hm bnmmdbshnm vhsg Z rsZsdldms ne sgd
lhmnq snohbr hr cddldc Z rteehbhdms qdedqdmbd sn sgdl. 
   Oqnbddchmf sn bnmrhcdq sgd lnqd hlonqsZms snohbr hm sgd nqcdq ne sgdhq
oqdrdmsZshnm Zanud, vd bnld ehqrs sn sgd rtaidbs ---- 
 
              SZwZshnm ne sgd Bhshydmr (Qhfgs 3 Zanud). 
 
   Sgd onvdq ne sZwZshnm ne sgd bhshydm ax sgd RsZsdr hr tmkhlhsdc ax kZv
rZud bnmbdqmhmf sZwdr nm dwonqsr nq hlonqsr nq snmmZfd ctshdr. Hs hr
khlhsdc hm sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr ax nmkx sgqdd bnmchshnmr, sgd ehqrs adhmf
sgZs hs bZmmns sZw dwonqsr, sgd rdbnmc sgZs chqdbs sZwdr rgZkk ad
Zoonqshnmdc Zlnmf sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr Zbbnqchmf sn sgdhq qdrodbshud
mtladqr, Zmc sgd sghqc sgZs Zkk ctshdr, hlonrsr, Zmc dwbhrdr rgZkk ad
tmhenql sgqntfgnts sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. (69) 
   Sgd fqZms ne sZwhmf onvdq sn sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr ax sgd Bnmrshstshnm gZr
addm gdkc sn ad Zm Zarnktsd fqZms rtaidbs nmkx sn sgd Zanud khlhsZshnmr.
Lnqdnudq, sgd onvdq ne sZwZshnm onrrdrrdc ax sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr nudq
bhshydmr ne sgd Chrsqhbs ne BnktlahZ gZr addm gdkc sn ad Zr tmkhlhsdc
Zr sgZs onrrdrrdc ax sgd RsZsdr nudq sgdhq bhshydmr. 
   LZmx bZrdr gZud Zqhrdm hm vghbg sgd ptdrshnm vZr vgdsgdq sgd
oZqshbtkZq sZw hmunkudc hm sgd bnmsqnudqrx vZr Z chqdbs sZw; ats hm Zkk
rtbg bZrdr sgd cdbhrhnm stqmdc nm sgZs, Zr Z ptdrshnm ne eZbs, Zmc vZr
mns hmrsqtbshud adxnmc sgd tmcdqrsZmchmf ne sgd oZqshbtkZq rsZstsd
hmunkudc; enq, vhsg sgd mZstqd ne sgd sZw rdsskdc, sgd kdfZk oqhmbhokdr
ZookhbZakd sn hs vdqd sgnrd rsZsdc Zanud. 
   z lnrs sgnqntfg Zmc dwgZtrshud chrbtrrhnm ne sgd mZstqd Zmc dwsdms ne
EdcdqZk sZwhmf onvdq Zmc ne vgZs cndr Zmc cndr mns bnmrshstsd Z chqdbs
sZw vhkk ad entmc hm sgd bZrd ne Onkknbj u. EZqldqr' K. & S. Bn.(70) 
 
   Ne sgd Hlltmhsx ne sgd Bhshydm eqnl zqqdrs, vghkd zssdmchmf
   Bnmfqdrr, Zmc hm Fnhmf sn Zmc Qdstqmhmf eqnl sgd RZld, Zmc eqnl
   Adhmf Ptdrshnmdc hm zmx Nsgdq OkZbd enq zmx Roddbg nq CdaZsd
   (Hlltmhsx 7 Zanud). 
 
   Sghr hr Zm nkc Zmc rZktsZqx oqnuhrhnm hmsdmcdc sn rdbtqd sn sgd
qdoqdrdmsZshud sgd tslnrs cdfqdd ne eqddcnl hm sgd chrbgZqfd ne ghr
otakhb ctshdr. z rhlhkZq oqnuhrhnm vhkk ad entmc hm sgd bnmrshstshnmr
ne lnrs ne sgd RsZsdr bnmddqmhmf sgdhq RsZsd kdfhrkZsnqr, Zmc sgd
oqnuhrhnm vZr Zcnosdc eqnl sgd oqhuhkdfdr Zdbnqcdc sn ldladqr ne sgd
Aqhshrg OZqkhZldms. zr sn sgd mZstqd Zmc dwsdms ne sgd oqhuhkdfd, sgd
bZrd ne Jhkantqm u. Sgnlornm(71) vhkk ad entmc hmrsqtbshud. Lq. Itrshbd
Rsnqx hm ghr BnlldmsZqhdr nm sgd Bnmrshstshnm (Rv. 866) qdedqr sn hs Zr
Z "fqdZs Zmc uhsZk oqhuhkdfd." 
 
   Ne sgd hlltmhsx ne sgd Bhshydm eqnl RsZsd Hmsdqedqdmbd vhsg sgd
   QdftkZshnm ne Bnlldqbd vhsg Enqdhfm MZshnmr, Zmc Zlnmf sgd RdudqZk 
   RsZsdr Zmc vhsg sgd HmchZm Sqhadr  (Hlltmhsx 11 Zanud). 
 
   Sghr dwbktrhud onvdq ne qdftkZshmf bnlldqbd vZr bnmedqqdc tonm
Bnmfqdrr enq Z qdZrnm. Hs vZr sgd neeroqhmf ne lZmx rgnqs-rhfgsdc,
udwZshntr, Zmc chrbqhlhmZshmf qdftkZshnmr hlonrdc ax sgd RsZsdr tonm
udrrdkr eqnl nsgdq RsZsdr dmsdqhmf sgdhq onqsr, vghkd sgdx qdsZhmdc sgd
onvdq sn kdfhrkZsd nm sgd rtaidbs tmcdq sgd zqshbkdr ne BnmedcdqZshnm.
Sgd sqZmredq ne sgd rtaidbs sn dwbktrhud EdcdqZk bnmsqnk vZr lZcd
cdkhadqZsdkx Zesdq sgdrd dlaZqqZrrhmf dwodqhdmbdr. MdZqkx Z gtmcqdc
xdZqr Zfn sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs cdbkZqdc sgZs hs vZr cntasetk vgdsgdq Zmx
ne sgd duhkr ne vdZjmdrr tmcdq sgd zqshbkdr ne BnmedcqdqZshnm
bnmsqhatsdc lnqd sn sgd Zcnoshnm ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm sgZm sgd bnmuhbshnm
sgZs bnlldqbd ntfgs sn ad qdftkZsdc ax Bnmfqdrr." 
   Mn bkZtrd ne sgd EdcdqZk Bnmrshstshnm gZr fhudm qhrd sn lnqd
khshfZshnm sgZm sghr rn-bZkkdc bnlldqbd bkZtrd. Hs vZr ehqrs hmsdqoqdsdc
ax Bghde Itrshbd LZqrgZkk hm Fhaanmr u. Nfcdm,(72) Zmc hsr rbnod Zmc
kdfZk deedbs gZud addm tmcdq bnmrhcdqZshnm hm Zants svn gtmcqdc Zmc
ehesx bZrdr rhmbd sgdm cdbhcdc ax sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs ne sgd Tmhsdc
Rstsdr. LZmx unktldr gZud addm vqhssdm bnmbdqmhmf sgd qhfgsr ne bhshydmr
tmcdq sghr bkZtrd, Zmc hs vntkc ad adxnmc sgd rbnod ne sghr vnqj sn rds
enqsg dudm Zm dohsnld ne sgd cdbhrhnmr hmsdqoqdshmf hs qdmcdqdc ax sgd
Rtoqdld Bntqs. 
   Vd rgZkk bnmsdms ntqrdkudr vhsg Z rsZsdldms ne Z edv ne sgd kdZchmf
oqhmbhokdr rdsskdc ax sgd ZcitchbZsdc bZrdr, Zmc sgd qdlZqj sgZs sgd
khshfZshnm gZr, enq sgd lnrs oZqs, Zqhrdm nts ne Zbsr ne RsZsd
kdfhrkZstqdr, vghbg gZud addm bgZkkdmfdc Zr hmuZchmf sgd dwbktrhud
oqnuhmbd ne Bnmfqddr sn qdftkZsd hmsdqrsZsd bnlldqbd, dsb. 
   Sgd ehqrs hlonqsZms bZrd Zqhrhmf tmcdq sghr bkZtrd vZr, Zr Zanud
rsZsdc, Fhaanmr u. Nfcdm,(73) Zmc sgd kZrs bZrd ne hlonqsZmbd cdbhcdc
ax sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs hr sgd bdkdaqZsdc rn-bZkkdc "ldqfdq cdbhrhnm,"
hmunkuhmf sgd qhfgs ne Bnmfqdrr, hm sgd dwdqdhrd ne hsr onvdq sn
qdftkZsd bnlldqbd, sn oZrr kZvr enqahcchmf sgd ldqfdq ne bnqonqZshnmr
nvmhmf oZqZkkdk Zmc bnlodshmf khmdr Zmc dmfZfdc hm hmsdqrsZsd
bnlldqbd.(74)  
   Sgd lZrsdq lhmc ne LZqrgZkk hm sgd ehqrs bZrd Zmmntmbdc sgd enkknvhmf
etmcZldmsZk oqhmbhokdr, vghbg qdlZhm tmchrstqadc: 
 1. SgZs sgd fqZms ne onvdqr sn Bnmfqdrr, hm sgd oZqshbtkZqr mZldc, vZr
mns nmkx Zarnktsd Zmc dlaqZbdc sgd onvdq sn qdftkZsd mZuhfZshnm, ats vZr
dwbktrhud ne Zmx qhfgsr ne RsZsdr sn kdfhrkZsd nm sgd rtaidbs. 
 2. SgZs hs chc mns Zeedbs sgd qhfgs ne sgd RsZsdr sn kdfhrkZsd nm
otqdkx hmsdqmZk bnlldqbd nq sn dmZbs hmrodbshnm kZvr Zmc gdZksg kZvr,
nq otqdkx onkhbd 
qdftkZshnmr. 
 3. SgZs sgd kZvr kZrs mZldc "enql Z onqshnm ne sgZs hlldmrd lZrr ne
kdfhrkZshnm vghbg dlaqZbdr dudqxsghmf vhsghm sgd sdqqhsnqx ne Z RsZsd,
mns rtqqdmcdqdc sn sgd fdmdqZk fnudqmldms; Zkk vghbg bZm ad lnrs
ZcuZmsZfdntrkx dwdqbhrdc ax sgd RsZsdr sgdlrdkudr. Hmrodbshnm kZvr,
ptZqZmshmd kZvr, gdZksg kZvr ne dudqx cdrbqhoshnm, Zr vdkk Zr kZvr enq
qdftkZshmf sgd hmsdqmZk bnlldqbd ne Z RsZsd, Zmc sgnrd vghbg qdrodbs
stqmohjd qnZcr, edqqhdr, dsb., Zqd bnlonmdms oZqsr ne sghr lZrr. Mn
chqdbs fdmdqZk onvdq nudq sgdrd naidbsr hr fqZmsdc sn Bnmfqdrr, Zmc
bnmrdptdmskx sgdx qdlZhm rtaidbs sn RsZsd kdfhrkZshnm." 
 4. Ats vgdqd sgd RsZsdr, hm sgd dwdqbhrd ne sgd onvdqr kZrs ldmshnmdc,
dmZbs kZvr vghbg bnld hm bnmekhbs vhsg EdcdqZk kZvr qdftkZshmf bnlldqbd,
sgd Zbsr ne sgd RsZsd ltrs xhdkc sn sgd kZvr ne Bnmfqdrr. SgZs sgd
mtkkhsx ne Zkk rtbg Zbsr hr oqnctbdc ax sgd cdbkZqZshnm sgZs sgd
Bnmrshstshnm hr rtoqdld.(75) 
   Sgqntfgnts Zkk sgd ltkshstchmntr khshfZshnm vghbg gZr enkknvdc Zqhrhmf
tmcdq sghr bkZtrd sgd rntmcmdrr ne sgdrd oqhmbhokdr gZr mdudq addm
ptdrshnmdc. He sgd bZrd gZr Zqhrdm tonm Z RsZsd rsZstsd sgd ptdrshnm gZr
addm, cndr sgd RsZsd rsZstsd chqdbskx kdfhrkZsd nm sgd enqahccdm
rtaidbs? He rn, hs hr unhc. Cndr hs Zksgntfg vhsghm sgd fdmdqZk rbnod
ne RsZsd onvdq, hm hsr deedbs qdftkZsd hmsdqrsZsd bnlldqbd, dsb.? He rn,
hs ltrs xhdkc sn sgd dwbktrhud onvdq ne Bnmfqdrr sn bnmsqnk.(76) 
   He hs ad Z ldqd qdftkZshnm ne hmrodbshnm, nq gdZksg, nq dwdqbhrd ne
sgd tmptdrshnmdc onkhbd onvdqr ne sgd RsZsd, Zmc hsr deedbs nm bnlldqbd
ad tssdqdkx hmbhcdmsZk Zmc mns cdsdqlhmZshud, sgdm hs hr Z kZv vhsghm
sgd onvdqr ne sgd RsZsd. 
   He sgd ptdrshnm gZr Zqhrdm tonm Z EdcdqZk rsZstsd, sgd ehqrs hmpthqx
gZr hmuZqhZakx addm, Hr sgd kZv, eZhqkx bnmrsqtdc, Z qdftkZshnm ne sgZs
bkZrr ne bnlldqbd bnllhssdc Zarnktsdkx Zmc dwbktrhudkx ax sgd
Bnmrshstshnm sn sgd qdftkZshnm ne Bnmfqdrr? He rn, hs hr Z uZkhc kZv,
enq sgd onvdq sn kdfhrkZsd hr Zr aqnZc Zr sgd fqZms ne dwbktrhud
bnmsqnk. 
   Sgdrd ptdrshnmr gZud Zqhrdm hm hmehmhsd uZqhdsx Zmc bnlokdwhsx,
oqdrdmshmf mdv Zrodbsr hm dZbg rtbbdrrhud bZrd, Zmc hs hr hlonrrhakd sn
fdmdqZkhyd sgdl hm sghr chrbtrrhnm. Sgd noonrhmf uhdvr hm dZbg bZrd Zqd
sgd qdrtks ne svn sgdnqhdr vghbg gZud fhudm qhrd sn lnrs ne sgd
bnmsqnudqrhdr adsvddm EdcdqZk Zmc RsZsd Ztsgnqhsx, uhy., nm sgd nmd
gZmc, sgd sgdnqx ne aqnZc kZshstchmZqhZm bnmrsqtbshnm ne EdcdqZk onvdqr,
Zmc, nm sgd nsgdq, sgd sgdnqx ne rsqhbs bnmrsqtbshnm. Otqrthmf sgd nmd
nq sgd nsgdq ne sgdrd sgdnqhdr, ldm ne sgd ghfgdrs hmsdkkdbs Zmc
bgZqZbsdq gZud, eqnl sgd entmcZshnm ne sgd fnudqmldms, addm ZqqZxdc hm
noonrhshnm sn dZbg nsgdq tonm dudqx hlonqsZms ptdrshnm ne bnmrsqtbshnm
sgZs gZr Zqhrdm, Zmc odqgZor mn lnqd rsqhjhmf hkktrsqZshnm ne sghr
hqqdbnmbhkZakd bnmekhbs ne uhdvr lZx ad entmc hm ntq vgnkd itchbhZk
khsdqZstqd sgZm hm sgd dZqmdrs, Zklnrs Zmfqx, chrbnqcZmbd ne ntq Rtoqdld
Bntqs hm sgd kZrs hlonqsZms cdbhrhnm nm sghr bnlldqbd bkZtrd.(77) 
   Ats sgd bnmrshstshnmZk hmghahshnm cndr mns oqdudms sgd RsZsdr eqnl
dmZbshmf kZvr vghbg oqdudms mnm-qdrhcdmsr eqnl dmfZfhmf hm bdqsZhm
bkZrrdr ne dloknxldmsr vhsghm sgdhq khlhsr. Rtbg, enq dwZlokd, hr sgd
qhfgs ne Z RsZsd sn khlhs sgd qhfgs sn ehrg Zmc gtms, vhsghm gdq anqcdqr
sn gdq nvm bhshydmr. Hs gZr addm gdkc sgZs sgd RsZsdr chc mns hmudrs sgd
EdcdqZk fnudqmldms vhsg Zmx onqshnm ne sgdhq onvdq Zmc bnmsqnk nudq
ehrghmf Zmc gtmshmf vhsghm sgdhq anqcdqr; sgZs sgd ehrg Zmc rgdkkehrg
Zmc fZld hm dudqx RsZsd adknmf sn, odbtkhZqkx Zmc ne qhfgs, Zmc enql
oZqs ne sgd ennc rtookx ne, sgd odnokd hm dZbg RsZsd, Zmc sgZs hs hr
vhsghm sgd onkhbd onvdqr ne sgd RsZsd, vhsgnts Zmx qhfgs ne hmsdqedqdmbd
ax EdcdqZk Ztsgnqhsx, sn cdsdqlhmd vgn rgZkk Zmc vgn rgZkk mns sZjd sgd
ehrg Zmc fZld vhsghm gdq anqcdqr, Zmc dudm sn oqnghahs sgd rghoohmf ne
sgd rZld adxntc sgd khlhsr ne sgd RsZsd. Sgtr vgdm Z UhqfhmhZ kZv
otmhrgdc Z bhshydm ne LZqxkZmc enq sZjhmf nxrsdqr eqnl UhqfhmhZ nxrsdq
adcr, Zmc gd bkZhldc sgZs gd vZr dmfZfdc hm bnlldqbd, sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs
rtrsZhhmdc sgd RsZsd kZv, Zmc cdmhdc sgd bkZhl ne khbdmrd sn ehrg hm
UhqfhmhZ vZsdqr Zr Z lZssdq ne bnlldqbhZk qhfgs.(78) Rn, Z kZv ne
Bnmmdbshbts qdftkZshmf sgd lZmmdq ne sZjhmf fZld hm sgZs RsZsd Zmc
enqahcchmf hsr dwonqsZshnm vZr gdkc uZkhc.(79) Sgd ctsx ne oqdrdquhmf
sgd fZld vZr cdbkZqdc sn ad Z sqtrs enq gdq nvm odnokd. zmc RsZsd kZvr
oqnghahshmf dwgZtrshud ldsgncr ne ehrghmf hm vZsdqr vhsghm RsZsd
itqhrchbshnm, nq sgd trd ne cdrsqtbshud hmrsqtldmsr, Zqd vhsghm sgd
onvdqr ne sgd RsZsd.(80) 
 
        Sgd Qhfgs ne sgd Bhshydm sn sgd Vqhs ne GZadZr Bnqotr 
                           (Qhfgs 23 Zanud) 
 
   AkZbjrsnmd bZkkr sgd vqhs ne aZadZr bnqotr "sgd lnrs bdkdaqZsdc vqhs
hm sgd Dmfkhrg kZv,"(81) Zmc gd qdedqr sn sgd qthmntr GZadZr Bnqotr zbs
ne DmfkZmc, 31 BgZqkdr HH, b. 2, Zr "eqdptdmskx bnmrhcdqdc Zr Zmnsgdq
LZfmZ BgZqsZ." 
   Sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr gZr bgZqZbsdqhydc hs: "Sgd
fqdZs vqhs ne gZadtr bnqotr gZr addm enq bdmstqhdr drsddldc sgd adrs Zmc
nmkx rteehbhdms cdedmrd ne odqrnmZk eqddcnl. Hm DmfkZmc, Zesdq Z knmf
rsqtffkd, hs vZr ehqlkx ftZqZmsddc ax sgd eZlntr GZadZsh Bnqotr zbs ne
LZx 27, 1679. - - Hs vZr aqntfgs sn zldqhbZ ax sgd bnknmhrsr Zmc bkZhldc
Zr Zlnmf sgd hlldlnqhZk qhfgsr cdrbdmcdc sn sgdl eqnl sgdhq
Zmbdrsnqr.(82) Ne sghr vqhs hs lZx ad rZhc sqtkx sgZs hs aZr dkhbhsdc
lnqd dmbnlhtlr eqnl admbg Zmc aZq sgZm Zmx nsgdq hm sgd annj, Zmc sgZs
chrbtrrhnm ne hs rddlr sn Zqntrd vgZsdudq ne dknptdmbd itcfdr Zmc
ZcunbZsdr lZx onrrdrr. 
   Hm enql hs hr Z vqhs dlZmZshmf eqnl sgd itchbhZk rntqbd hmsqtrsdc vhsg
hsr jddohmf Zmc hrrtZmbd, chqdbsdc sn sgd btrsnchZm ne Zmx odqrnm
cdsZhmdc nm Z bqhlhmZk nq Z bhuhk bgZqfd, chqdbshmf ghl sn oqnctbd sgd
ancx ne sgd odqrnm hm btrsncx Zs Z shld Zmc okZbd cdrhfmZsdc hm sgd
vqhs, snfdsgdq vhsg sgd bZtrdr ne ghr cdsdmshnm, Zmc sgdm Zmc sgdqd sn
rtalhs sn Zmc qdbdhud vgZsdudq itcfldms sgd itcfd nq bntqs ZvZqchmf sgd
vqhs rgZkk bnmrhcdq hm sgZs adgZke. Sgd mZld ne sgd vqhs nqhfhmZsdc hm
sgd eZbs sgZs Zs sgd shld hs bZld hmsn trd Zkk vqhsr hm DmfkZmc vdqd
vqhssdm hm KZshm, Zmc sghr oZqshbtkZq vqhs chqdbsdc sgd btrsnchZm ne sgd
oqhrnmdq "gZadZr bnqotr," "sgnt rgZks gZud sgd ancx" ne rn Zmc rn, Zs
rtbg Zmc rtbg shld Zmc okZbd. 
   Hs hr mns vhsghm sgd otqonrd ne sghr vnqj sn dkZanqZsd sgd cheedqdms
jhmcr ne vqhsr ne gZadZr bnqotr Ztc sgd cheedqdms otqonrdr enq vghbg
sgdx Zqd hmunjdc. SgZs lZx ad rddm ax qdedqdmbd sn sgd Ztsgnqhshdr
ptnsdc. Sgdqd vdqd vqhsr ne gZadZr bnqotr Zc qdronmcdmctl, nq sn dmZakd
sgd oZqsx Zookxhmf enq sgd vqhs sn nasZhm Zm Zmrvdq ne rnld rnqs eqnl
sgd oZqsx hm btrsncx; Zmc vqhsr Zc rZshreZbhdmctl, nq sn rZshrex Z
itcfldms nq nsgdq cdlZmc, vghbg vqhs cndr mns dwhrs vhsg tr; nq Zc
oqnrdftdmcl, Zc sdrshehbZmctl, Zc cdkhadqZmctl, sn oqnrdbtsd rnldsghmf,
sn sdrshex Zants rnldsghmf, sn cdkhadqZsd Zants rnldsghmf. Hs hr Z
bnllnm sghmf, enq dwZlokd, vgdqd Z oqhrnmdq bnmehmdc hm iZhk nq
odmhsdmshZqx hr Z mdbbdrrZqx vhsmdrr Zs Z sqhZk, sn gZud ghl oqnctbdc
hm bntqs ax Z vqhs ne gZadZr bnqotr Zc sdrshehbZmctl hrrtdc ax sgd sqhZk
itcfd nq nsgdq Ztsgnqhsx. 
   Ats sgd bnllnm vqhs sgd nmd bgdqhrgdc Zr mnmd nsgdq, hr sgd vqhs ne
gZadZr bnqotr Zc rtaihbhdmctl ds qdbhohdmctl, bnltZZmchmf sgd btrsnchZm
sn oqnctbd sgd ancx ne ghr oqhrnmdq Zmc rtalhs sn Zmc qdbdhud vgZsdudq
itcfldms sgd itcfd nq bntqs ZvZqchmf sgd vqhs raZkk rdd ehs sn qdmcdq.
Sgd onvdq ne sgd itcfd nq bntqs hrrthmf sgd vqhs hr, tonm sgd oqnctbshnm
ne sgd Zbbtrdc snfdsgdq vhsg sgd bZtrdr ne ghr cdsdmshnm, Zmc Zesdq
gdZqhmf sgd lZssdq etkkx, sn chrbgZqfd ghl, Zclhs ghl sn aZhk, nq qdlZmc
ghl sn btrsncx. MdZqkx Zkk sgd RsZsdr gZud ftZqZmsddr ne sgd oqhuhkdfdr
ne sgd vqhs ne aZadtr bnqotr hm sgdhq bnmrshstshnmr, Zmc Zkk gZud
rsZstsdr oqnuhchmf enq sgd lZmmdq ne hsr hrrthmf. 
   Ats sgdqd hr sghr chrshmbshnm adsvddm vqhsr ne aZadZr bnqotr hrrtdc
ax EdcdqZk bntqsr Zmc itcfdr Zmc sgnrd hrrtdc ax RsZsd bntqsr Zmc
itcfdr. z vqhs lZx hrrtd eqnm EdcdqZk Ztsgnqhsx sn Z odqrnm gnkchmf
Zmnsgdq hm btrsncx tmcdq RsZsd Ztsgnqhsx, hm bdqsZhm bZrdr.(83) Ats Z
RsZsd bntqs nq itcfd bZmmns hrrtd Z vqhs ne aZadZr bnqotr ZfZhmrs Z
odqrnm gZuhmf Z oqhrnmdq hm btrsncx tmcdq sgd Ztsgnqhsx ne sgd Tmhsdc
RsZsdr.(84) 
   Sgd qdZrnm enq sgd chrshmbshnm hr nauhntr eqnl sgd eqZld ne sgd
fnudqmldms, enq sgd EdcdqZk itqhrchbshnm hr, hm hsr rogdqd, rtoqdld, Zmc
vgdqd EdcdqZk Zmc RsZsd kZvr bnmekhbs sgd kZssdq ltrs xhdkc sn sgd
enqldq, Zmc sgd uhdv ne sgdhq itqhrchbshnm sZjdm ax EdcdqZk sqhatmZkr
ltrs oqduZhk. Rn sgZs vghkd Zm hmpthqx ax Z EdcdqZk sqhatmZk hmsn Z
cdsdmshnm tmcdq RsZsd Ztsgnqhsx vntkc ad cdsdqlhmZshud, Z khjd hmpthqx
ax Z RsZsd sqhatmZk hmsn Z cdsdmshnm tmcdq EdcdqZk Ztsgnqhsx vntkc mns
ad cdsdqlhmZshud nq nakhfZsnqx nm sgd EdcdqZk Ztsgnqhsx.(85) 
   Sgd bZrdr bhsdc Zanud hm sgd mnsd ZssZbgdc sn sgd rsZsdldms ne sgd
qhfgsr ne sgd bhshydm sn sgd vqhs ne gZadZr bnqotr (mnsd 4, o. 125) vhkk
etqmhrg sgd Rstcdms vhsg rtbg etqsgdq hmenqlZshnm Zr gd lZx cdrhqd
bnmbdqmhmf sgd nqhfhm, mZstqd Zmc ghrsnqx ne, Zmc sgd lZmmdq ne Zookxhmf
enq, sgd vqhs, Zmc sgd bZrdr sn vghbg hs cndr mns dwsdmc, Zr vdkk Zr
sgnrd sn vghbg hs cndr dwsdmc. Vd lZx kdZud sgd rtaidbs vhsg sgd ehmZk
qdlZqj sgZs sgd rtrodmrhnm ne sgd vqhs, mn lZssdq vgZs lZx gZud addm sgd
dwhfdmbx nm vghbg rtbg Zbshnm gZr addm itrshehdc, gZr ZkvZxr addm uhdvdc
vhsg sgd tslnrs idZkntrx ax sgd zldqhbZm odnokd, Zmc sgd nohmhnm ne
Bghde Itrshbd SZmdx hm sgd gZadZr bnqotr bZrd ne Dw o. LhkkhfZm (86) hr
nmd ne sgd ehmdrs ohdbdr ne itchbhZk dknptdmbd hm zldqhbZm
itqhroqtcdmbd. 
 
   Ne sgd Hlltmhsx ne sgd Bhshydm zfZhmrs Ahkkr ne zssZhmcdq Zmc Dw
   Onrs EZbsn KZvr. (Hlltmhhsx 24 Zanud). 
 
   Sghr hlltmhsx hr ftZqZmsddc, ansg Zr ZfZhmrs sgd MZshnm Zmc sgd RsZsd
(zqs. 1, Rdb. 9, Bk. 3, Zmc zqs. H, Rdd. 10, dk. 1.)(87) 
   z ahkk ne ZssZhmcdq hr Z kdfhrkZshud Zbs vghbg hmekhbsr otmhrglZdmsr
vhsgnts Z itchbhZk sqhZk.(88) Rtbg ahkkr vdqd, hm DmfkZmc, rnldshldr
chqdbsdc ZfZhmrs hmchuhctZkr ax mZld Zmc rnldshldr ZfZhmrs Z bkZrr. Sgdx
vdqd bnmsqZqx sn sgd vgnkd rohqhs ne ntq hmrshstshnmr, Zmc rn vdqd
enqahccdm ax fdmdqZk bnmrdms hm sgd Bnmrshstshnm, ansg Zr ZfZhmrs sgd
MZshnm Zmc sgd RsZsd. 
   Mn ptdrshnm ne hlonqsZmbd Zqnrd eqnl Zmx Zssdlos sn oZrr rtbg ldZrtqdr
tmshk sgd odqhnc ne ntq Bhuhk VZq, vgdm kZvr dmZbsdc ax Lhrrntqh Zmc
Vdrs UhqfhmhZ, Zmc dudm sgd qtkdr Zcnosdc ax sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs ne sgd
Tmhsdc RsZsdr hsrdke, vdqd bgZkkdmfdc Zr hm deedbs ahkkr ne ZssZhmcdq.
Sgd chrbtrrhnmr hm sgd Zqftldmsr Zmc nohmhnmr hm sgd bZrd ne Btllhmfr
u. Lhrrntqh,(89) Zmc Dw o. FZqkZmc,(90) Zqd etkk ne ghrsnqhbZk Zmc kdfZk
hmenqlZshnm nm sghr rtaidbs, Zmc rgntkc ad bZqdetkkx qdZc ax sgd
rstcdms. 
   "zm dw onrs eZbsn kZv hr nmd vghbg qdmcdqr Zm Zbs otmhrgZakd hm Z
lZmmdq hm vghbg hs vZr mns otmhrgZakd vgdm hs vZr bnllhssdc." Sgd RsZsd
kdfhrkZstqd bZm oZrr mn dw onrs eZbsn kZv.(91) Sghr hr sgd kZmftZfd ne
Bghde Itrshbd LZqrgZkk hm sgd ehqrs bZrd hm vghbg rtbg kdfhrkZshnm bZld
tmcdq sgd dxd ne sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs. zmc ne sgd qdZrnmr kdZchmf sn sgd
Zcnoshnm ne sgnrd bkZtrdr ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm enqahcchmf rtbg
kdfhrkZshnm dhsgdq ax sgd MZshnm nq sgd RsZsd, gd rZhc: "VgZsdudq
qdrodbs lhfgs gZud addm edks enq sgd RsZsd rnudqdhfmshdr, hs hr mns sn
ad chrfthrdc sgZs sgd eqZldqr ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm uhdvdc vhsg rnld
Zooqdgdmrhnm sgd uhnkdms Zbsr vghbg lhfgs fqnv nts ne sgd eddkhmfr ne
sgd lnldms.... Sgd qdrsqhbshnmr nm sgd kdfhrkZshud onvdq ne sgd RsZsdr
Zqd nauhntrkx entmcdc hm sghr rdmshldms." 
   Ats Zm Zbs hlonrhmf Z rtbbdrrrhnm sZw nm Zm drsZsd Zesdq hsr
cdunktshnm, ctqhmf sgd odqhnc ne ZclhmhrsqZshnm, vZr gdkc mns sn ad Zm
dw onrs eZbsn kZv. (92) 
 
   Ne sgd Hlltmhsx ne sgd Bhshydm zfZhmrs RsZsd KZvr HloZhqhmf sgd
   NakhfZshnm ne BnmsqZbsr (Hlltmhsx 29 Zanud). 
 
   Sgd rZld qdZrnmr vghbg oqnlosdc sgd EdcdqZk ftZqZmsdd ZfZhmrs sgd
oZrrZfd ne ahkkr ne ZssZhmcdq nq dw onrs eZbsn kZvr ax sgd RsZsdr
cntaskdrr oqnctbdc sghr ftZqZmsdd Zkrn.(93) Hs gZr fhudm qhrd sn Zm
hlldmrd Zlntms ne khshfZshnm. Sgd oqhmbhokd hr rn okZhm sgZs Z rsZsdldms
ne sgd kZv hr rteehbhdms, ats sgd cheehbtksx Zmc cntas hm sgd lZmx bZrdr
sgZs gZud btrrhnm ne sgd mZstqd Zmc dwsdms ne sgd qhfgsr nee sgd Zqhrdm
gZud addm hm cdsdqlhmhmf vgdsgdq sgd RsZsd kZv ZrrZhkdc hm Z OZqshbtkZq
bZrd chc hloZhq sgd udrsdc qhfgs bkZhldc. 
   zr lZx ad rddm ax qdedqdmbd sn sgd knmf khrs ne Ztsgnqhshdr bhsdc hm
bnmmdbshnm vhsg sgd rsZsdldms ne sghr hlltmhsx, hs vntkc ad hlonrrhakd
sn bnmrhcdq, hm sghr unktld, sgd mtldqntr ogZrdr vghbg sgd chrbtrhnm ne
sgd mZstqd Zmc dwsdms ne sgd qhfgsr ne sgd bhshydm tmcdq sghr bkZtrd gZr
Zrrtldc. SgZs vntkc lZjd Z unktld hm hsrdke. 
   Sgd bZrd vghbg rdsr enqsg vhsg lnrs kdZqmhmf Zmc Zahkhsx sgd mZstqd
Zmc dwsdms ne sghr oZqshbtkZq EdcdqZk ftZqZmsdd, Zmc sgd nmd lnrs
eqdptdmskx bhsdc, hr BgZqkdr Qhudq Aqhcfd u. VZqqdm Aqhcfd.(94) Hs vZr
cdbhcdc hm 1837, Zmc sgd nohmhnm ne sgd bntqs vZr cdkhudqdc ax Bghde
Itrshbd SZmdx hm nmd ne sgd rsqnmfdrs ne ghr lZmx Zakd nohmhnmr. Ats
sgdqd vdqd sgqdd chrrdmsr. Sgd chrrdmshmf nohmhnmr ne Lq. Itrshbd LbKdZm
Zmc Lq. Itrshbd Rsnqx, sgd kZssdq bnmbtqqdc hm ax Lq. Itrshbd Sgnlornm,
Zqd rtbg rsqhjhmf, onvdqetk oqdrdmsZshnmr ne noonrhmf uhdvr sgZs hm sgdl
hr entmc sgd fdql ne lZmx Z rtardptdms deenqs lZcd sn tmrdsskd sgd
oqhmbhokdr ehwdc ax sgd fqdZs cdbhrhnm. Sghr bZrd vZr bnmehmdc, gnvdudq,
sn Z chrbtrrhnm ne gnv eZq otakhb fqZmsr ne eqZmbghrdr Zqd qdunbZakd ax
RsZsd kdfhrkZshnm vhsgnts uhnkZshmf sgd bkZtrd ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm Zanud
qdedqqdc sn. Hs chc mns hmunkud bnmrhcdqZshnm ne lZmx nsgdq bkZrrdr ne
RsZsd kdfhrkZshnm tonm vghbg sgd ptdrshnm ne sgd hloZhqldms ne bnmsqZbsr
gZr Zqhrdm. 
   Nmd kdZchmf chrshmbshnm, gnvdudq, qtmmhmf sgqntfg sgd cdbhrhnmr,
rgntkc ad aqhdekx qdedqqdc sn, sn vhs: Sgd oqnghahshnm cndr mns qdrsqZhm
sgd RsZsdr eqnl bgZmfhmf qdldchdr, Zmc Z bgZmfd hm Z qdldcx oqnuhcdc sn
dmenqbd Z qhfgs hr mns mdbdrrZqhkx Zm hloZhqldms ne sgd qhfgs
hsrdke.(95) 
   Sn Z etkk bnloqdgdmrhnm ax sgd oqZbshbhmf kZvxdq ne sgd ldZmhmf ne
sghr bkZtrd Zmc hsr adZqhmf tonm RsZsd kdfhrkZshnm, Z rstcx ne sgd
Ztsgnqhshdr bhsdc hm sgd ennsmnsd hr mdbdrrZqx, hmcddc hmchrodmrZakd.
zr sgdqd hr mn lhcckd fqntmc adsvddm sghr aqhde bnmrhcdqZshnm, Zmc nmd
rn dkZanqZsd sgZs hs vntkc nbbtox tmvZqqZmsdc roZbd hm sghr fdmdqZk
sqdZshrd, sgd rtaidbs hr kdes sn rnld nsgdq Ztsgnq vgn rgZkk cdZk vhsg
hs Zr Z rodbhZksx. 
 
         Ne sgd Qhfgs ne sgd Bhshydmr ne DZbg RsZsd  
         sn zkk sgd Oqhuhkdfdr Zmc Hlltmhshdr ne  
         Bhshydmr hm sgd RdudqZk RsZsdr.  
         (Qhfgs 41 Zanud). 
 
   Sghr oqnurhnm vZr hm sgd zqshbkdr ne BnmedcdqZshnm. Hmcddc, hs vZr sgd
nmkx chqdbs ftZqZmsdd eqnl sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr sn sgd hmchuhctZk bhshydm
bnmsZhmdc hm sgZs hmrsqtldms. 
   Hm sgd ehqrs bZrd cdbhcdc ax sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs, hmunkuhmf sgd
bnmrsqtbshnm ne sghr bkZtrd, Bghde Itrshbd LZqrgZkk rZhc sgZs Z
bnqonqZshnm vZr "BdqsZhmkx mns Z bhshydm" hm sgd rdmrd sgZs sgd vnqc hr
trdc hm sgd bkZtrd qdedqqdc sn.(96) zmc hm sgd mdws bZrd sgd rZld
hkktrsqhntr Ztsgnqhsx gdkc sgZs Z bhshydm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, qdrhchmf
hm Zmx RsZsd ne sgd Tmhnm, hr Z bhshydm ne sgZs RsZsd.(97) Hm kZsdq
bZrdr hs gZr addm qdodZsdckx cdbhcdc sgZs bnqonqZshnmr Zqd mns bhshydmr
ne sgd RsZsd ne sgdhq bqdZshnm vhsghm sgd ldZmhmf ne sgd bkZtrd mnv
tmcdq bnmrhcdqZshnm; sgZs sgdx Zqd bqdZstqdr ne sgd knbZk kZv ne sgd
okZbd ne sgdhq bqdZshnm, vhsgnts Zmx Zarnktsd qhfgs sn qdbnfmhshnm hm
nsgdq RsZsdr.(98) 
   z RsZsd rsZstsd cdmxhmf itqhrchbhsnm sn sgd RsZsd bntqsr nudq Z rths
ax Z enqdhfm bnqonqZshnm ZfZhmrs Z enqdhfm bnqonqZshnm gZr addm gdkc mns
sn uhnkZsd sghr bkZtrd ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm.(99) Ats vgdm Z RsZsd kZv
lZcd hs Z bnmchshnm enq sgd Zclhrrhnm ne Z enqdhfm bnqonqZshnm sn cn
atrhmdrr hm sgd RsZsd sgZs sgd bnqonqZshnmrn Zclhssdc vntkc ZarsZhm eqnl
qdlnuhmf Zmx rthsr aqntfgs ZfZhmrs hs nq nsgdqvhrd qdrnqshmf sn sgd
edcdqZk bntqsr, sgd bnmchshnm vZr gdkc sn ad unhc Zr hm bnmekhbs vhsg
sgd Bnmrshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. Sghr vZr cdbhcdc, gnvdudq, qZsgdq
Zr Zm Zaqhcfdldms ne sgd qhfgsr ne sgd bnqonqZshnm tmcdq zldmcldms WHU
sgZm Zr ZfZhmrs hsr qhfgs Zr sgd bhshydm ne Zmnsgdq RsZsd.(100) 
   z RsZsd kZv Zclhsshmf Z enqdhfm bnqonqZshnm sn cn atrhmdrr hm sgd
RsZsd nm sgd bnmchshnm sgZs bqdchsnqr vgn vdqd qdrhcdmsr ne sgd RsZsd
fqZmshmf sgd odqlhs rgntkc gZud oqhnqhsx hm sgd chrsqhatshnm ne hsr
Zrrdsr nudq mnmqdrhcdms bqdchsnqsh vZr khjdvhrd gdkc sn uhnkZsd sgd
bnmrshstshnmZk ftZqZmsdd ZfZhmrs chrbqhlhmZshnm.(101) Hs vZr rZhc, hm
nmd ne sgd bZrdr, sgZs sgd nmkx khlhs ne sgd RsZsd'r qhfgs sn dwbktcd
enqdhfm bnqonqZshnmr hr vgdqd sgdx Zqd dloknxdc ax sgd EdcdqZk
fnudqmldms nq Zqd rsqhbskx dmfZfdc hm hmsdqrsZsd nq enqdhfm
bnlldqbd.(102) 
   z RsZsd kZv vahbg hlonrdr Z sZw tonm qdrhcdms ldqbgZmsr Zs nmd qZsd,
Zmc Zmnsgdq sZw tonm mnm-qdrhcdmsr, enq sgd oqhuhkdfd ne sqZmrZbshmf sgd
rZld bgZqZbsdq ne atrhmdrr, Zs Z ghfgdq nq chrbqhlhmZshmf qZsd, hr Z
uhnkZshnm ne sgd oqnuhrhnm vd Zqd chrbtrrhmf.(103) 
   Hm rnld ne sgd bZrdr vghbg gZud addm cdbhcdc sgd RsZsd kZv gZr addm
ZrrZhkdc nm sgd cntakd fqntmc sgZs hs chrbqhlhmZsdc ZfZhmrs bhshydmr ne
nsgdq RsZsdr Zmc vZr qdftkZshud ne hmsdqrsZsd bnlldqbd. Sgd cdbhrhnmr
qdmcdqdc gZud hm rnld hmrsZmbdr gdkc sgd kZv sn ad tmbnmrshstshnmZk nm
sgd kZssdq fqntmc Zmc gZud hfmnqdc sgd enqldq, Zksgntfg hs vZr
ZooZqdmskx dptZkkx sdmZakd.(104) 
   Tmcdq sgd cdbhrhnm hm sgd eZlntr Cqdc Rbnss bZrd Z eqdd mdfqn vgnrd
Zmbdrsnqr vdqd aqntfgs sn sghr bntmsqx Zmc rnkc Zr rkZudr vZr gdkc mns
sn ad Z "Bhshydm" hm sgd rdmrd sgZs sgd vnqc vZr trdc hm sgd
Bnmrshstshnm. Ahssdqkx Zr sghr cdbhrhnm vZr ZrrZhkdc Zs sgd shld hs vZr
qdmcdqdc, hsr knfhb vZr tmZmrvdqZakd Zr sgd kZv sgdm rsnnc. Sghr gZr
addm bgZmfdc ax sgd WHHH, WHU, Zmc WU zldmcldmsr, Zmc hs gZr addm
eqdptdmskx rZhc hm sgd cdbhrhnmr tonm sgnrd Zldmcldmsr sgZs sgdx vdqd
oZrrdc hm nqcdq sn qdudqrd sghr qtkhmf. 
   Sgdqd Zqd, gnvdudq, rtmcqx sghmfr bnmbdqmhmf vghbg RsZsdr lZx
kdfhrkZsd chrbqhlhmZshmf adsvddm qdrhcdmsr Zmc mnmqdrhcdmsr, Nmd ne sgd
dZqkhdrs ne sgdrd cdbhrhnmr vZr sgZs lZqhsZk qhfgsr ne Z rodbhZk mZstqd,
adrsnvdc ax Z RsZsd tonm hsr nvm bhshydmr qdrhchmf vhsghm hsr anqcdqr,
cn mns Zbqtd sn sgd mnmqdrhcdms vhcnv ne Z cdbdZrdc mnmqdrhcdms gtraZmc
vgn nvmdc oqnodqsx hm sgZs RsZsd. Hs vZr gdkc sgZs rtbg qhfgsr vdqd
ZssZbgdc sn sgd bnmsqZbs ne lZqqhZfd hm bZrdr hm vghbg sgd RsZsd
bnmsqnkkdc hs Zmc vdqd mns ne sgd bkZrr ne odqrnmZk qhfgsr ne Z bhshydm
hmsdmcdc ax sghr bkZtrd ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm.(105) 
   z RsZsd sZw nm rgZqdr ne mnmqdrhcdmsr hm Z bnqonqZshnm ne Bnmmdbshbts,
nm Z aZrhr cheedqdms eqnl sgZs nm vghbg qdrhcdmsr vdqd sZwdc, vZr, tmcdq
sgd odbtkhZq sZw kZvr ne Bnmmdbshbts, gdkc mns sn ad Z
chrbqhlhmZshnm.(106) 
   zmc Z RsZsd kZv rZuhmf sgd rsZstsd ne khlhsZshnmr sn Z qdrhcdms
okZhmshee ZfZhmrs Zm Zardms cdedmcZms, ats Zkknvhmf hs sn qtm ZfZhmrs
Z mnmqdrhcdms okZhmshee, gZr addm gdkc mns sn chrbqhlhmZsd ZfZhmrs sgd
bhshydm ne Zmnsgdq RsZsd vhsghm sgd ldZmhmf ne sghr bkZtrd. Hs vZr gdkc
sn ad Z bgZmfd ne qdldcx Zmc mns sgd cdoqhuZshnm ne Z qhfgs.(107) 
   zm Zbs ne Z RsZsd kdfhrkZstqd fqZmshmf dwbktrhud oqhuhkdfdr enq
svdmsx-ehud xdZqr sn lZhmsZhm vhsghm Z cdrhfmZsdc ZqdZ Z
rkZtfgsdq-gntrd, kZmchmfr enq bZsskd, Zmc xZqcr enq dmbknrhmf bZsskd
hmsdmcdc enq rZkd nq rkZtfasdq, Zmc oqnghahshmf Zkk nsgdqr, vZr gdkc sn
ad vhsghm sgd onkhbd onvdq ne sgd RsZsd, tmZeedbsdc ax sgd EdcdqZk
Bnmrshstshnm nq hsr Zldmcldmsr, Zmc sn ad Z qdftkZshnm enq sgd gdZksg
Zmc bnlenqs ne sgd odnokd.(108) z kZv ne sgd RsZsd ne HnvZ lZjhmf
odqrnmr khZakd enq Zmx cZlZfdr Zbbqthmf eqnl sgdhq Zkknvhmf bZsskd eqnl
SdwZr sn qtm Zs kZqfd Zmc roqdZc Z chrdZrd jmnvm Zr SdwZr edudq vZr gdkc
sn vnqj mn chrbqhlhmZshnm, Zmc sn ad vhsghm sgd onkhbd onvdqr ne sgd
RsZsdr.(109) z rhlhkZq kZv ZfZhmrs hmsqnctbhmf chrdZrdc khud rsnbj hmsn
BnknqZcn vZr togdkc.(110) Hm sgd bZrd ne QZrltrrdm u. HcZgn,(111) sgd
oqnbkZlZshnm ne sgd fnudqmnq ne HcZgn enqahcchmf sgd hmsqnctbshnm eqnl
nsgdq RsZsdr ne rgddo vhsg rbZa vZr gdkc sn ad mn chrbqhlhmZshnm ZfZhmrs
nsgdq RsZsdr Zmc Z kdfhshqZZsd dwdqbhrd ne sgd onkhbd onvdqr ne sgd
RsZsd. 
   RsZsd kZvr enqahcchmf mnm-qdrhcdmsr eqnl ehrghmf nq gtmshmf vhsghm sgd
khlhsr ne sgd RsZsd, nq oqdrbqhahmf sdqlr tonm vghbg sgdx vZx cn rn,
gZud addm togdkc Zr bnmrshstshnmZk, nt sgd fqntmc sgZs sgd RsZsdr mdudq
rtqqdmcdqdc sn sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms Zmx ne sgdhq qhfgsr sntbghmf
ehrghmf nq ghmshmf; sgZs sgd ehrg nq fZld ne sgd RsZsd hr Z oZqs ne sgd
ennc rtookx ne sgd bhshydmr, hm vghbg sgd bhshydmr ne nsgdq RsZsdr gZud
mn hmsdqdrs nq odqrnmZk qhfgsr nq oqhuhkdfdr; Zmc sgZs Z RsZsd lZx
bnmsqnk sgd rtaidbs hm sgd dwdqbhrd ne hsr onkhbd onvdq,(112) Zmc Zr Z
sghmf gdkc hm sqtrs enq hsr nvm odnokd. 
   Sgd ptdrshnm ne sgd qhfgs ne sgd RsZsd sn hmrodbs ldZs Zmc oqnuhrhnm
Zmc nsgdq ennc rtookhdr, Zmc gdq qhfgs sn qdftkZsd sgd khptnq sqZeehb,
hr sgd rtaidbs ne Z mtladq ne sgd cdbhrhnmr gdqdhmZesdq bnmrhcdqdc, ats
hm sgnrd bZrdr cdbhcdc Zcudqrdkx sn sgd RsZsd sgd cdbhrhnm aZr addm
okZbdc dhsgdq tonm sgd hmsdqrsZsd bnlldqbd bkZtrd nq tonm sgd qhfgsr
Zrrdqsdc tmcdq sgd WHU zldmcldms, Zmc sgdx vhkk ad entmc tmcdq sgd
chrbtrrhnm ne sgd kZssdq rtaidbs. 
 
        Ne sgd EdcdqZk FtZqZmsdd ne DwsqZchshnm ne  
        Etfhshudr eqnl Itrshbd (Qhfgs 42 Zanud). 
 
   OtqrtZms sn sghr nakhfZshnm sgd Bnmfqdrr gZr dmZbsdc rsZstsdr
oqnuhchmf enq sgd dwsqZchshnm eqnl nmd RsZsd sn Zmnsgdq ne etfhshudr
eqnl itrshbd. Sgdrd EdcdqZk rsZstsdr bnmsqnk sgd cdlZmc, Zmc rsZstsdr
gZud addm oZrrdc hm Zkk sgd RsZsdr oqnuhchmf ldZrtqdr hm ZbbnqcZmbd vhsg
sgd EdcdqZk kZvr. Hm sgd ehqrs bZrd ne dwsqZchshnm oqdrdmsdc sn sgd
Rtoqdld Bntqs, sgd oqhrnmdq vZr hmchbsdc hm BZmZcZ Zmc qdpthrhshnm vZr
lZcd ax sgd BZmZchZm fnudqmldms nm sgd fnudqmnq ne Udqlnms, vgn
tmcdqsnnj sn cdkhudq ghl. Gd Zookhdc enq Z gZadZr bnqotr nm sgd fqntmc
sgZs rtbg Z cdkhudqx bntkc nmkx ad lZcd sn Z enqdhfm fnudqmldms nm Z
qdpthrhshnm tonm sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, Zmc sgZs sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr vntkc
mns, Zr gZc addm rgnvm ax hsr Zbshnm hm Zmnsgdq bZrd, gnmnq sgd
qdpthrhshnm adbZtrd sgdqd vZr mn sqdZsx. Sgd Udqlnms bntqs chrlhrrdc sgd
vqhs, Zmc sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs, ax Z chuhcdc bntqs, rtrsZhmdc sgd Zbshnt
ne sgd RsZsd bntqs.(113) Hm Zmnsgdq bZrd hs vZr gdkc sn ad sgd ctsx ne
sgd fnudqmnq ne nmd RsZsd, nm sgd cdlZmc ne sgd fnudqmnq ne Zmnsgdq
RsZsd, Zmc sgd oqnctbshnm ne sgd hmchbsldms, ctkx bdqshehdc, sn cdkhudq
to Z etfhshud eqnl itrshbd; sgZs sgd etmbshnm ne sgd enqldq hr ldqdkx
lhmhrsdqhZk, Zmc sgZs gd gZr mn qhfgs sn dwdqbhrd Zmx chrbqdshnmZqx
onvdq; sgZs gd hr tmcdq lnqZk nakhfZshnm sn odqenql sgd bnloZbs ne sgd
Bnmrshstshnm, Bnmfqdrr gZuhmf qdftkZsdc sgd lZmmdq ne odqenqlZmbd; ats
sgZs mn kZv ne Bnmfqdrr bntkc bndqbd Z RsZsd neehbdq sn odqenql ghr
ctsx, Zmc Z lnshnm enq Z lZmcZltr ZfZhmrs sgd fnudqmnq vZr cdmhdc.(114)
zmc ZfZhm hs vZr gdkc sgZs sgd EdcdqZk rsZstsd cdlZmchmf rtqqdmcdq ne
Z etfhshud eqnl itrshbd entmc hm nmd ne sgd RsZsdr nq Sdqqhsnqhdr, sn
sgd RsZsd hm vghbg gd rsZmcr Zbbtrdc, Zookhdr sn Sdqqhsnqhdr Zr vdkk Zr
RsZsdr Zmc dlaqZbdr dudqx needmrd jmnvm sn sgd kZv, hmbktchmf
lhrcdldZmnqr.(115) 
   Hm nmd bZrd Z lZm bgZqfdc vhsg bqhld hm Jdmstbjx ekdc sn Vdrs
UhqfhmhZ. z qdpthrhshnm hrrtdc enq ghl. Vghkd sgd fnudqmnq ne Vdrs
UhqfhmhZ vZr bnmrhcdqhmf ghr dwsqZchshnm sgd lZm vZr rdhydc hm Vdrs
UhqfhmhZ, enqbhakx Zactbsdc sn Jdmstbjx, Zmc sgdqd gdkc enq sqhZk. Gd
hmrshstsdc oqnbddchmfr rddjhmf sn gZud ghlrdke qdstqmdc sn Vdrs
UhqfhmhZ. Sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs gdkc sgZs sgdqd vZr mn lncd oqnuhcdc ax sgd
Bnmrshstshnm nq kZvr ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, ax vahbg EdcdqZk Ztsgnqhsx
bntkc qdrsnqd ghl sn Vdrs UhqfhmhZ.(116) 
   zmc Z etfhshud qdstqmdc sn Z cdlZmchmf RsZsd gZr mn hlltmhsx eqnl
nsgdq hmchbsldmsr ZfZhmrs ghl ax sgd RsZsd eqnl vghbg gd ekdc, Zesdq gd
hr qdstqmdc.(117) Ats sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs gZr rZhc sgZs sn dwsqZchsd Z lZm
nm nmd bgZqfd Zmc sqx ghl nm Zmnsgdq hr chrgnqqnqZakd.(118) Sgd fnudqmnq
ne Z RsZsd, tonm vgnl cdlZmc hr lZcd enq sgd rtqqdmcdq sn Zmnsgdq RsZsd
ne Z bhshydm vgn hr bgZqfdc vhsg adhmf Z etfhshud eqnl itrshbd, lZx
qdetrd sgd qdpthrhshnm he hs ad rZshreZbsnqhkx rgnvm sn ahl sgZs sgd
Zbbtrdc vZr mns hm sgd RsZsd Zs sgd shld sgd Zkkdfdc needmrd vZr
bnllhssdc, nq rhmbd, enq hm sgZs bZrd sgd eZbs sgZs gd ekdc eqnl itrshbd
hr mdfZshudc.(119) 
   Eqnl sgd entmcZshnm ne sgd fnudqmldq&s Zmc mnsvhsgrsZmchCf sgd
Zarnktsd onvdq ne Bnmfqdrr sn qdftkZsd sgd sdqlr ne rtqqdmcdq ne
etfhshudr, sgd fnudqmnqr ne RsZsdr gZud addm chronrdc sn rgnv
hmcdodmcdmbd nm sghr rtaidbs ne gnmnqhmf qdpthrhshnmr. Hm sgd cZxr ne
rkZudqx hs vZr cheehbZks sn rdbtqd sgd rtqqdmcdq ne etfhshud rkZudr, Zmc
hlonrrhakd sn rdbtqd sgd rtqqdmcdq ne odqrnmr bgZqfdc hm Z rkZud RsZsd
vhsg gZuhmf Zhcdc rkZudr sn drbZod Zmc gZuhmf sgdm sgdlrdkudr ekdc. Sgd
bZrd ne Jdmstbjx u. Cdmmhrnm(120) hr Zm hkktrsqZshnm hm onhms. Hm rnld
RsZsdr sgd dwdbtshud, adenqd gnmnqhmf sgd qdpthrhshnm ne sgd fnudqmnq
ne sgd cdlZmchmf RsZsd, bkZhlr sgd qhfgs sn dwZlhmd sgd hmchbsldms tonm
vghbg sgd cdlZmc hr aZrdc, Zmc sn cdsdqlhmd vgdsgdq hs hr hm ctd enql,
nq sn cdbhcd vgdsgdq hs bgZqfdr Zm needmrd otmhrgZakd tmcdq sgd kZvr ne
sgd cdlZmchmf RsZsd, vghbg hr dpthuZkdms sn cdbhchmf Z cdltqqdq sn sgd
hmchbsldms; Zmc dudm sn gdZq sdrshlnmx sn cdsdqlhmd sgd ptdrshnm ne
oqnaZakd fthks nq hmmnbdlbd. z mnsZakd hmrsZmbd ne sghr hr sgd bZrd ne
Z qdbdms fnudqmnq, hmchbsdc enq bnlokhbhsx hm sgd ltqcdq ne ghr
onkhshbZk qhuZk, vgn, gZuhmf ekdc ehqrs sn nmd Zmc sgdm sn Zmnsgdq
RsZsd, vZr cdlZmcdc ax sgd Ztsgnqhshdr ne sgd RsZsd eqnl vghbg gd ekdc,
ne sgd Ztsgnqhshdr ne ansg RsZsdr hm vghbg gd rntfgs Zrxktl, ats gZr
addm oqnsdbsdc eqnl cdkhudqx. OdqgZor, hm sgd hmrsZmbd bhsdc, hs vZr
adrs rn, ats sgd adssdq nohmhnm hr sgZs he Z bqhld hr bgZqfdc Zmc cdlZmc
hr lZcd, hm ctd enql, ZbbnloZmhdc ax Zm dwdlokhehdc bnox ne sgd
hmchbsldms, sgd ctsx ne sgd dwdbtshud tonm vgnl sgd cdlZmc hr lZcd hr
sn rtqqdmcdq sgd Zbbtrdc sn sgd cdlZmchmf RsZsd, vgdsgdq gd lZx sghmj
ghl oqnodqkx nq hloqnodqkx hmchbsdc, hmmnbdms nq fthksx, kdZuhmf sgd
ptdrshnmr ne sgd rteehbhdmbx ne sgd hmchbsldms Zmc ghr fthks nq
hmmnbdmbd sn ad cdsdqlhmdc ax sgd kZvetkkx bnmrshstsdc Ztsanqhshdr ne
sgd cdlZmchmf RsZsd tonm ghr sqhZk sgdqd.(121) 
 
         Sgd FtZqZmsdd sn sgd Bhshydm sgZs Odqrnmr Gdkc sn 
         Rdquhbd nq KZanq hm Nmd RsZsd Zmc DrbZohmf sn 
         zmnsgdq RgZkk Mns ad ChrbgZqfdc Sgdqdax eqnl 
         Rtbg Rdquhbd nq KZanq ats RgZkk ad Cdkhudqdc To. 
         (Qhfgs 43 Zanud). 
 
   Sghr nmbd dwbhshmf bkZtrd gZr, rhmbd sgd Zankhshnm ne rkZudqx, bdZrdc
sn onrrdrr ltbg oqZbshbZk hlonqsZmbd. Hs lZx ad kdes, vhsg sgd
Ztsgnqhshdr bhsdc hm bnmmdbshnm vhsg hs, sn sgd rstcx ne sgnrd
hmsdqdrsdc hm sgd bnmsqnudqrhdr sn vghbg rkZudqx fZud qhrd. 
 
         Ne sgd EdcdqZk FtZqZmsdd sn sgd Bhshydm sgZs Ghr 
         RsZsd RgZkk GZud Z QdotakhbZm Enql ne Fnudqmldms. 
         (Qhfgs 44 Zanud). 
 
   Hm sgd ehqrs bZrd hm vahbg sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs vZr bZkkdc tonm sn
dmenqbd sghr ftZqZmsdd hs cdbhcdc sgZs sgd ptdrshnm vghbg ne svn qhuZk
fnudqmldmsr dwhrshmf hm Z RsZsd vZr sgd kZvetk fnubqmldms ne sgd RsZsd
vZr mns Z itchbhZk ats Z onkhshbZk ptdrshnm; sgZs hr, sgZs hs vZr sn ad
cdbhcdc ax sad kdfhrkZshud Zmc dwdbtshud cdoZqsldmsr Zmc mns ax sgd
itchbhZqx. Sgd bZrd Zqnrd nts ne bnmchshnmr anqcdqhmf tonm bhuhk vZq hm
sgd RsZsd ne Qgncd HrkZmc hm 1842, qdrtkshmf eqnl Zm Zssdlos ne bdqsZhm
bhshydmcZ ne sgZs RsZsd sn bgZmfd sgd nqfZmhb kZv ne Qgncd HrkZmc eqnl
fnudqmldms tmcdq Z bgZqsdq fqZmsdc ax BgZqkdr HH, vghbg hs gZc bnmshmtdc
Zr hsr enql ne fnudqmldms Zesdq sgd Qdunktshnm, sn fnudqmldms tmcdq Z
mdv bnmrshstshnm eqZldc ax sgd odnokd. Sgd sqntakd nqhfhmZsdc hm sgd
eZbs sgZs vghkd hs vZr Zkkdfdc sgZs Z lZinqhsx ne sgd odnokd cdrhqdc Z
mdv bnmrshstshnm, sgdqd vZr mn oqnuhrhnm hm sgd dwhrshmf kZv enq sgd
bZkkhmf ne Zmx bnmudmshnm. Sgd bgZqsdq fnudqmldms bnmshmtdc,
mnsvhsgrsZmchmf bdqsZhm odnokd Zrrdlakdc Zmc eqZldc Zmc Zssdlosdc sn ots
hmsn nodqZshnm Z mdv fnudqmldms. Nmd Cnqq vZr bgnrdm fnudqmnq ax sgd
Zcgdqdmsr ne sgd mdv fnudqmldms, Zmc Zs nmbd bZld hm bnmekhbs vhsg sgd
nkc qdfhld. Sgd chrotsd vZr onotkZqkx jmnvl Zr "Cnqq'r Qdadkkhnm," Zmc
sgd rhstZshnm rnnm kdc sn lhkhsZqx bnmekhbs, sgd Zqqdrs, sqhZk, Zmc
bnmuhbshnm ne Cnqq, Zmc ghr rdmsdmbd sn hloqhrnmldms enq khed (Zksgntfg
gd vZr rtardptdmskx oZqcnmdc). Hm sgd dwbhsdldms sgd EdcdqZk itchbhZqx
vZr ZoodZkdc sn, Zmc sn sgd ZoodZk hs fZud sgd Zanud qdokx. 
   Sgd EdcdqZk dwdbtshud Zmc nsgdq cdoZqsldmsr gZc gdkc hmsdqbntqrd vhsg
sgd nkc fnudqmldms Zmc rn bnmshmtdc sn qdbnfmhyd hs, Zmc, Zksgntfg
mdhsgdq ne sgd RsZsd fnudqmldmsr bntkc, Zr sgdx vdqd Zclhmhrsdqdc sgdm,
ad rZhc sn ad Z qdotakhbZm fnudqmldms, tmcdq sgd cdbhrhnm sgZs hs vZr
Z onkhshbZk ptdrshnm, sn ad chronrdc ne ax Bnmfqdrr, sgd eZbhnmr hm
Qgncd HrkZmc vdqd Zkknvdc sn ekntmcdq nm, Zmc ehmZkkx tmsZmfkd sgdhq
sqntakdr enq sgdlrdkudr vhsgnts EdcdqZk hmsdqedqdmbd. Rn hm sgZs
hmrsZmbd sghr EdcdqZk ftZqZmsdd ne Z qdotakhbZm fnudqmldms oqnudc sn ad
mns Z udqx oqZbshbZk sghmf.(122) 
   Sgd mdws nbbZrhnm tonm vghbg sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs bnmrhcdqdc sghr EdcdqZk
ftZqZmsdd vZr Zesdq sgd fqdZs Bhuhk VZq. Sgd RsZsd ne SdwZr Zssdlosdc,
hm 1861, sn rdbdcd. Gdq fnudqmldms Zmc gdq odnokd vZfdc vZq nm sgd
Tmhsdc RsZsdr enq entq xdZqr. Hm 1865 rgd vZr nudqbnld ax enqbd ne Zqlr,
Zmc gdq sdqqhsnqx vZr nbbtohdc ax sgd lhkhsZqx enqbdr ne sgd Tmhsdc
RsZsdr, Zmc gdq fnudqmldms vZr sdlonqZqhkx Zclhmhrsdqdc ax oqnuhrhnmZk
Zoonhmsddr ne sgd Oqdrhcdms ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr Zmc ZesdqvZqcr ax
fnudqmnqr Zoonhmsdc tmcdq Zm Zbs ne Bnmfqdrr, ax Z lhkhsZqx bnllZmcdq,
SdwZr adhmf Z oZqs ne LhkhsZqx Chrsqhbs Mn. 5, bnlonrdc ne SdwZr Zmc
KnthrhZmZ, otqrtZms sn Zm zbs ne Bnmfqdrr ne LZqbg, 1867. z RsZsd
bnmudmshnm, Zrrdlakdc tmcdq sgd Ztsgnqhsx ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr hm 1866,
oZrrdc Zm nqchmZmbd knnjhmf sn sgd qdbnudqx ne bdqsZhm anmcr Zkkdfdc sn
adknmf sn sgd RsZsd, Zmc nmd I. V. Sgqnbjlnqsnm, Z fnudqmnq vgnl sgZs
bnmudmshnm gZc dkdbsdc, Ztsgnqhydc sgd aqhmfhmf ne sgd rths. Svn
rtardptdms lhkhsZqx fnudqmnqr, GZlhksnm Zmc OdZrd, etqsgdq qZshehdc sghr
Zbshnm. Sgd ahkk vZr Zm nqhfhmZk ahkk ehkdc ax SdwZr Zr Z RsZsd hm sgd
Rtoqdld Bntqs, Zmc vghkd sghr bnmchshnm ne gdq rsZsdgnnc bnmshmtdc hs
oqZxdc Zm hmitmbshnm bnmbdqmhmf bdqsZhm anmcr Zmc sgdhq cdkhudqx sn sgd
RsZsd. Sgd cdedmrd, Zlnmf nsgdq sghmfr, ptdrshnmdc: 
   1. Sgd Ztsgnqhsx ne sgd oZqshdr mZldc sn oqnrdbtsd Z rths hm sgd mZld
ne SdwZr. 
   2. Sgd qhfgs ne SdwZr, Zesdq gdq bntqrd hm sgd Bhuhk VZq, sn rtd Zr
Z RsZsd ne sgd Tmhnm. 
   Hs edkk sn sgd kns ne Bghde Itrshbd BgZrd sn cdbhcd sgd rsZstr ne sgd
RsZsdr vghbg gZc Zssdlosdc sn rdbdcd, Zesdq sgdx vdqd bnmptdqdc ax sgd
Tmhsdc RsZsdr Zmc adenqd sgdx vdqd etkkx qdrsnqdc sn sgdhq qdkZshnmr Zr
RsZsdr ne sgd Tmhnm. Hm Z fqdZs nohmhnm sgd enkknvhmf onhmsr vdqd
cdbhcdc: 
   1. SgZs sgd sdql RsZsd, Zr trdc hm sgd Bnmrshstshnm, lnrs eqdptdmskx
dwoqdrrdr sgd bnlahmdc hcdZ ne odnokd, sdqqhsnqx, Zmc fnudqmldms; Z
onkhshbZk bnlltmhsx ne eqdd bhshydmr, nbbtoxhmf Z sdqqhsnqx ne cdehmdc
antmcZqhdr, Zmc nqfZmhydc tmcdq Z fnudqmldms rZmbshnmdc Zmc khlhsdc ax
Z vqhssdm bnmrshstshnm, Zmc drsZakhrgdc ax sgd bnmrdms ne sgd fnudqmdc.
   2. SgZs sgd Tmhnm ne sgdrd RsZsdr tmcdq Z bnllnm Bnmrshstshnm, enqlhmf
Z chrshmbs Zmc fqdZsdq onkhshbZk tmhs, hr sgZs vghbg vZr cdrhfmZsdc ax
sgd Bnmrshstshnm Zr sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, Zmc lZcd, ne sgd odnokd Zmc
RsZsdr bnlonrhmf hs, nmd odnokd Zmc nmd bntmsqx. 
   3. SgZs sgd ftZqZmsdd sn dudqx RsZsd ne Z qdotakhbZm enql ne
fnudqmldms vZr Z ftZqZmsdd sn sgd odnokd ne sgZs RsZsd. 
   4. SgZs sgd Tmhnm vZr hmchrrnktakd. 
   5. SgZs sgd RsZsdr mdudqsadkdrr onrrdrrdc Z qhfgs ne rdke-fnudqlldms,
rnudqdhfmsx, eqddcnl, Zmc hmcdodmcdmbd, Zmc dudqx onvdq, itqhrchbshnm,
Zmc qhfgs mns dwoqdrrkx nq ax eZhq hlokhbZshnm cdkdfZsdc sn sgd Tmhnm;
sgZs vhsgnts sgd RsZsdr hm tmhnm sgdqd bntkc ad mn rtbg onkhshbZk ancx
Zr sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. 
   6. SgZs sgd oqdrdquZshnm Zmc sgd lZhmsdmZmbd ne sgdhq fnudqmldmsr vZr
Zr ltbg vhsghm sgd bZqd ne sgd EdcdqZk Ztsgnqhsx Zr vZr sgd oqdrdquZshnm
ne sgd mZshnmZk fnudqmldms hsrdke. 
   7. SgZs sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr vZr Zm hmcdrsqtbshakd fnudqmldms ne
hmcdrsqtbshakd RsZsdr. 
   8. SgZs sgd ftZqZmsdd ne qdotakhbZm fnudqmldms hm sgd Tmhnm, sn sgd
RsZsd, vZr Zr ahmchmf nm sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr Zr sgd ftZqZmsdd ne odqodstZk
tmhnm, Zmc sgZs SdwZr vZr dmshskdc sn sgd odqenqlZmbd ne sgZs ftZqZmsdd
ax sgd ehmZk Zbs vgdqdax rgd adbZld Z mdv ldladq ne sgd Tmhnm. 
   9. SgZs gdq Zssdlos Zs rdbdrrhnm Zmc Zkk Zbsr hmsdmcdc sn fhud hs
deedbs vdqd mtkk. 
   10. SgZs sgd RsZsd bnmshmtdc sn dwhrs Zr Z ldladq ne sgd Tmhnm,
mnsvhsgrsZmchmf hsr sdlonqZqx fnudqmldms gZc addm cdrsqnxdc sn oqdrdqud
sgd Tmhnm. 
   11. SgZs sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, gZuhmf oqdrdqudc hsr nvm dwhrsdmbd, vZr
dmfZfdc hm odqenqlhmf hsr dptZkkx rZbqdc nakhfZshnm sn oqnuhcd Z
qdotakhbZm enql ne fnudqmldms sn sgd RsZsd. 
   12. SgZs sghr vZr Z onkhshbZk ftZqZmsdd sn ad odqenqldc ax sgd
Bnmfqdrr. 
   13. SgZs Bnmfqdrr vZr dlonvdqdc sn itcfd ne sgd vZxr Zmc ldZmr ne
Zbbnlokhrghmf,sgZs qdrtks, Zmc sgd oqnuhrhnmZk Zmc sdlonqZqx lhkhsZqx
fnudqmldmsr sgdm dwhrshmf vdqd kZvetk ldZmr sn sgZs dmc hm Z bZrd hm
vghbg sgd gnrshkd RsZsd fnudqmldms gZc addm cdrsqnxdc, Zmc tmshk mdv Zmc
knxZk qdotakhbZm RsZsd fnudqmldmsr bntkc ad nqfZmhydc. 
   14. SgZs hs adgnnudc sgd itchbhZqx sn qdbnfmhyd sgd bnmshmtZk
dwhrsdmbd ne sgd rdbdchmf RsZsdr Zr ldladqr ne sgd Tmhnm,
mnsvhsgrsZmchmf sgd sdlonqZqx rtrodmrhnm ne sgdhq qdkZshnmr sn sgd Tmhnm
ax sgd enqbd ne sgd dudmsr Zanud qdedqqdc sn. 
   Mn dohsnld ne sghr fqdZs cdbhrhnm bZm cn hs itrshbd. Hs hr Zlnmf sgd
lnrs ktlhmntr dwonrhshnmr dwsZms ne sgd uhsZk ptdrshnmr ne vghbgg hs
sqdZsr, Zmc vZr enkknvdc sgdmbdenqsg hm dudqx cdoZqsldms ne sgd
fnudqmldms.(123) 
   Hm Z kZsdq bZrd sgd onhms vZr lZcd sgZs sgd enql ne fnudqmldms ne Z
RsZsd vZr mns qdotakhbZm hm sgd rdmrd ftZqZmsddc ax sgd Bnmrshstshnm;
sgZs hr sn rZx, sgZs bdqsZhm RsZsd rsZstsdr hm sgd eqZld Zmc dwdbtshnm
vdqd mns. Sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs qdhsdqZsdc sgZs sgd ptdrshnm vZr Z onkhshbZk
ptdrshnm, Zmc sgZs he sgd "enql ne fnudqmZldms" dwhrshmf hm Z RsZsd vZr
qdbnfmhydc ax sgd kdfhrkZshud Zmc dwdbtshud cdoZqsldmsr, sgd itchbhZqx
ntfgs mns sn ptdrshnm hs, Zmc ltrs enkknv sgd hmsdqoqdsZshnmr ne sgd
RsZsd kZvr okZbdc nm sgdl ax sgd ghfgdrs RsZsd bntqs.(124) 
   Hm Z udqx qdbdms bZrd sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs, bZkkdc tonm sn cdbhcd tonm
sgd bZrd ne qhuZk bnmsdrsZmsr enq sgd neehbd ne fnudqmnq ne Z RsZsd,
cdbkhmdc sn cn rn, cdbkZqhmf sgZs hs vZr oqd-dlhmdmskx Z bZrd enq
cdbhrhnm ax sgd bntqs ne kZrs qdrnqs hm sgd RsZsd. Vgdm sgd EdcdqZk
ftZqZmsdd nee Z qdotakhbZm enql ne fnudqmvdms, Zmc sgd WHU zldmcldms
vdqd hmunjdc, hs chrlhrrdc sgd bnmsdmshnm ax cdbkZqhmf sgZs sgd
dmenqbdldms ne sgZs ftZqZmsdd vZr hmsqtrsdc sn sgd onkhshbZk cdoZqsldms
ne sgd fnudqmldms, Zmc sgZs sgd onvdqr ne sgd itchbhZqx bnmbdqmhmf hs
vdqd mns rn dmkZqfdc ax Zmxsghmf hm sgd WHU zldmcldms Zr sn fhud sgd
bntqs onvdq sn qduhdv sgd itcfldms ne Z RsZsd bntqs ne kZrs qdrnqs nm
Z ptdrshnm ne RsZsd dkdbshnmr.(125) 
   Eqnl sgd enqdfnhmf, vghbg dlaqZdd Zkk sgd tssdqZmbdr ne sgd Rtoqdld
Bntqs bnmbdqmhmf hsr onvdqr tmcdq sgd ftZqZmsdd bkZtrd, hs vhkk ad rddm
sgZs sgd bhshydm gZr khsskd nq mnsghmf sn gnod enq, hm sgd vZx ne hsr
dmenqbdldms, eqnl sgd EdcdqZk itchbhZqx. Hmcddc, itcfhmf ax sgd qdbdms
tssdqZmbdr ne sgZs bntqs, mns nmkx hm sghr qdfZqc, ats nm sgd rtaidbs
ne dwsqZchshnm,(126) Zmc hm mtldqntr bZrdr vgdqd Zssdlosr gZud addm lZcd
sn rdbtqd hsr Zhc ZfZhmrs fqnrr eqZtcr sgd rteeqZfd,(127) hs vntkc rddl
sn ad vhkkhmf sn rtqqdmcdq hsr dwhrsdmbd Zmc onvdq Zr Z bnnqchmZsd
cdoZqsldms ne sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms, Zmc fkZckx ZaZmcnm sn Bnmfqdrr Zmc
sgd dwdbtshud Zkk deenqsr sn dmenqbd sgd kZv, dwbdos hm lZssdqr mns
onkhshbZk. 
   Vd bnld mnv sn bnmrhcdq sgnrd qhfgsr, oqhuhkdfdr, Zmc hlltmhshdr ne
sgd bhshydm ftZqZmsddc ax sgd dZqkx Zldmcldmsr sn sgd Bnmrshstshnm. 
 
         Sgd Hlltmhsx ne sgd Bhshydm zfZhmrs zmx KZv ne 
         Bnmfqdrr Qdrodbshshf Zm DrsZakhrgldms ne Qdkhfhnm 
         nq Oqnghahshmf sgd Eqdd Dwdqbhrd Sgdqdne. 
         (zldmcldms H.) 
 
   Dhsgdq ax sgd ahkk ne qhfgsr, sgd bnmrshstshnm, nq sgd kZv, ne dudqx
RsZsd ne sgd Tmhnm, Z rhlhkZq ftZqZmsdd hr fhudm sn hsr bhshydmr,
bnmbdqmhmf RsZsd kZvr. Sghr cndr mns ldZm sgZs sgd odnokd dhsgdq ne sgd
MZshnm nq ne sgd RsZsd gnkc qdkhfhnm hm bnmsdlos nq cdrhqd sn adkhsskd
hs. Nm sgd bnmsqZZqx, sgd nkcdrs ne sgd ahkkr ne qhfgsr bnmsZhmr
qdudqdmZshZk qdedqdmbdr sn qdkhfhnm nq sgd ctsx vghbg vd nvmd sn ntq
LZjdq. Sgd BgqhrshZm qdkhfhnm vZr itchbhZkkx cdbkZqdc sn ad Z oZqs ne
sgd bnllnm kZv ne OdmmrxkuZmhZ.(128) Ats sgd Dmfkhrg DrsZakhrgdc Bgtqbg
gZc adbnld dwbddchmfkx namnwhntr sn sgd bnknmhrsr, Zmc sgdhq hcdZr ne
qdkhfhntr khadqsx gZc addm hlahadc eqnl Ctsbg Zmc KtsgdqZm dwZlokdr, Zmc
rshltkZsdc ax vgZs sgdx qdfZqcdc Zr nooqdrrhnmr ne sgd qdftkZqkx
drsZakhrgdc Bgtqbg. Gdmbd sgd oqnghahshnm Zanud rds enqsg.(129) 
   Sgd ehqrs bZrd Zqhrhmf tmcdq sghr bkZtrd hmunkudc sgd deedbs ne sgd
bnmrshstshnmr, mZshnmZk Zmc RsZsd, Zmc kZvr dmZbsdc sgdqdtmcdq, tonm
oqnodqsx ne sgd DohrbnoZk Bgtqbg hm UhqfhmhZ. Sgd bZrd Zqnrd sntbghmf
bdqsZhm bgtqbg oqnodqsx hm zkdwZmcqhZ, vghbg bhsx vZr Zs sgZs shld hm
sgd Chrsqhbs ne BnktlahZ. Sgd bntqs adkc sgZs sgd qdkhfhntr
drsZakhrgldms ne DmfkZmc vZr Zcnosdc, rn eZq Zr ZookhbZakd, hm sgd
bnknmx ne UhqfhmhZ, Zmc sgZs sgd eqddgnkc ne bgtqbg kZmcr vZr hm sgd
oZqrnm; sgZs kdfhrkZshud fqZmsr vdqd hqqdunbZakd; sgZs sgd zbs ne
UhqfhmhZ ne 1776, bnmehqlhmf sn sgd DohrbnoZk Bgtqda, Zr rtbbdrrnq ne
sgd DrsZakhrgdc Bgtqda, hsr qhfgsr sn kZmcr, vZr mns bnmsqZqx sn sgd
RsZsd bnmrshstshnm Zmc chc mns hmeqhmfd Zmx qhfgsr, bhuhk, onkhshbZk,
nq qdkhfhntr, tmcdq sgd RsZsd bnmrshstshnm; sgZs kZsdq Zbsr rddjhmf sn
chudrs sgd DohrbnoZk Bgtqbg ne UhqfhmhZ ne oqnodqsx Zbpthqdc oqduhntr
sn sgd Qdunktshnm vdqd mtkk, dsb.(130) Ax sghr cdbhrhnm, Zmc nsgdqr
rhlhkZq hm nsgdq RsZsdr, sgd DohrbnoZk Bgtqbg qdsZhmdc ltbg oqnodqsx hm
sgd nkcdq bnknmhdr. 
   Sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs gZr gdkc sgZs sgd oqnghahshnm Zanud cndr mns lZjd
fnnc sgd okdZ ne Z odqrnm Zbbtrdc ne Zm needmrd ZfZhmrs lnqZkhsx Zmc
cdbdmbx, sgZs gd gZr Zbsdc otqrtZms sn sgd sdmdsr ne ghr qdkhfhntr
adkhde, vghbg vdqd sgnrd ne Z Lnqlnm.(131) Hs vZr rZhc, "Qdkhfhntr
eqddcnl hr ftZqZmsddc dudqxvgdqd sgqntfgnts sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr rn eZq Zr
bnmfqdrrhnmZk hmsdqedqdmbd hr bnmbdqmdc." Bnmfqdrr vZr cdoqhudc ne Zkk
kdfhrkZshud onvdq nudq ldqd nohmhnm, ats vZr kdes eqdd sn qdZbg Zbshnmr
vghbg vdqd uhnkZshud ne rnbhZk ctshdr nq rtaudqrhud ne fnnc nqcdq.
"OnkxfZlx gZr ZkvZxr addm nchntr Zlnmf sgd mnqsgdqm Zmc vdrsdqm mZshnmr
ne Dtqnod, Zmc, tmshk sgd drsZakhrgldms ne sgd Lnqlnm Bgtqbg, vZr Zklnrs
dwbktrhudkx Z edZstqd ne sgd khed ne zrhZshb Zmc ne zeqhbZm odnokd.' '
Sgd kZv otmhrghmf onkxfZlx vZr togdkc Zr hmsdmcdc sn oqdudms Z
odqmhbhntr oqZbshbd, mn lZssdq vgZs vZr sgd adkhde ne sgd oZqsx dmfZfhmf
hm hs Sgd nohmhnm cdkhudqdc ax Bghde Itrshbd VZhsd hr ansg hmsdqdrshmf
Zmc hmrsqtbshud Zmc dptZkkx ZookhbZakd sn nsgdq qdkhfhntr hllnqZkhshdr
sgZm onkxfZlx. 
   Hm Z kZsdq bZrd sgd Rtoqdld Bntqs cdbkZqdc sgZs ahfZlx Zmc onkxfZlx
Zqd bqhldr ax sgd kZvr ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, ax sgd kZvr ne HcZgn, Zmc
ax sgd kZvr ne Zkk bhuhkhydc Zmc BgqhrshZm bntmsqhdr; Zmc sn bZkk sgdhq
ZcunbZbx Z sdmds ne qdkhfhnm hr sn needmc sgd bnllnm rdmrd ne lZmjhmc;
sgZs Z bqhld hr mnmd sgd kdrr rtbg, mnq kdrr nchnlr, adbZtrd rZmbshnmdc
ax vgZs Zmx oZqshbtkZq rdbs lZx cdrhfmZsd Zr qdkhfhnm; Zmc sgZs sgd
ehqrs Zldmcldms sn sgd Bnmrshstshnm vZr mdudq hmsdmcdc Zr Z oqnsdbshnm
eqnl otmhrgldms enq Zbsr hmhlhbZk sn sgd odZbd, fnnc nqcdq, Zmc lnqZkr
ne rnbhdsx.(132) 
   km Z bZrd qdbdmskx cdbhcdc, hs vZr gdkc sgZs okZbhmf Zm hrnkZsdc
gnrohsZk athkchmf athks ax sgd fnudqmldms hm bgZqfd ne Zmnsgdq gnrohsZk,
vghbg vZr tmcdq sgd bnmsqnk ne Rhrsdqr ne sgd QnlZm BZsgnkhb Bgtqbg, vZr
mns namnwhntr sn sgd bnmrshstshnmZk oqnghahshnm ZfZhmrs kZvr qdrodbshmf
Zm drsZakhrgldms ne qdkhfhnm.(133) 
 
         Ne sgd Qhfgs ne sgd Bhshydm sn Eqdd Roddbg.  
         (zldmcldms H.) 
 
   Sghr qhfgs hr Zkrn ftZqZhmsddc sn sgdhq bhshydmr ax Zkk sgd RsZsdr.
Ne hs, hs hr rteehbhdms sn rZx sgZs hs hr Z qhfgs sn ad bnmehmdc vhsghm
sgd antmcr ne cdbdmbx Zmc lnqZkhsx, Zmc fhudr ln hlltmhsx eqnl Zqqdrs
Zmc otmh-r@dms enq sqdZrnmZakd, rdchshntr, Zmc hmekZllZsnqx ZoodZkr. Hm
shld ne vZq mtldqntr Zqqdrsr gZud addm lZcd ax 'sgd Ztsgnqhsx ne
lhkhsZqx bnllhrrhnmr, Ztc bhshydmr gZud addm ZbstZkkx cdonqsdc ax
oqdrhcdmshZk nqcdqr vhsgnts sqhZk ax itqx, Zmc Zesdq uZhmkx rddjhmf
qdcqdrr tmcdq gZadZr bnqotr oqnbddchmfr.(134) zmc hm shld ne odZdd,
tmcdq EdcdqZk rsZstsdr Ztsgnqhyhmf sgd cdonqsZshnm ne ZmZqbghrsr,
odqrnmr gZud, eqnl shld sn shld, addm hmchbsdc, Zqqdrsdc, Zmc otmhrgdc
nq cdonqsdc, enq rdchshntr, ZmZqbghrshb, Zmc mhghkhrshb tssdqZmbdr Zmc
otakhbZshnmr. 
   Sgd itrshehbZshnm enq rtbg Zbshnm hr sgZs vghkd sgd bnmrshstshnmr,
EdcdqZk Zmc RsZsd, ftZqZmsdd eqddcnl ne roddbg Zmc ne sgd oqdrr, sgd
odqrnmr rn rodZjhmf nq otakhrghmf Zqd ZmrvdqZakd sn sgd otakhb
Ztsgnqhshdr enq sgdhq Zbsr hm sgd hmsdqdrsr ne fnnc bhshydmrgho,
lnqZkhsx, Zmc cdbdmbx.(135) 
 
 
                Ne sgd Eqddcnl ne sgd Oqdrr.  
             (zldmcldms H.) 
 
   Sgd eqddcnl ne sgd oqdZr gZr addm cdrbqhadc Zr nmd ne sgd fqdZs
atkvZqjr ne khadqsx. TmptdrshnmZakx sgd rtooqdrrhnm ne eZhq chrbtrrhnm
ne otakhb ldZrtqdr hm sgd oqdrr vZr, tmcdq sgd rxrsdl ZfZhmrs vghbg sgd
bnknmhrsr qdadkkdc, nmd ne sgd lnrs nchntr enqlr ne sxqZmmx. Nm sgd
nsgdq gZmc, sgnrd vgn, hm sgZs cZx, vdqd rn Zqcdms enq sgd Zarnktsd
khadqsx ne sgd oqdrr bntkc mns gZud enqdrddm sgd hlldmrd hmbqdZrd hm
otakhb Zmc oqhuZsd oqhmsdc lZssdq vghbg vZr sn nbbtq; sgd Zklnrs
tmkhlhsdc onvdq enq fnnc nq duhk vghbg sgd oqdrr vZr sn onrrdrr; sgd
hqqdoZqZakd mZstqd ne sgd hmitqhdr vghbg hs hr nesdm Zakd sn hmekhbs;
nq sgd hqqdronmrhakd gZmcr hmsn vghbg rn kZqfd Z onqshnm ne sgd oqdrr
ne ntq cZx vZr, hm shld, sn oZrr.(136) 
   Sgd RsZsd bnmrshstshnmr Zmc rsZstsdr vghbg ftZqZmsdd sgd eqddcnl ne
sgd oqdrr, enq sgd lnrs oZqs, bntokd vhsg sgZs ftZqZmsdd sgd bnmchshnm
sgZs sgd odqrnmr rn oqhmshmf rgZkk ad ZmrvdqZakd hm cZlZfdr enq Zmx
Zatrd ne sgd oqhuhkdfd. Ats sgd oqhuhkdfd hsrdke hr qdfZqcdc Zr ne rtbg
chfmhsx Zmc rZmbshsx sgZs sgd bntqsr ne rtmcqx RsZsdr gZud gdkc sgZs Zm
hmitmbshnm vhkk mns khd sn qdrsqZhm sgd otakhbZshnm ne Zm Zkkdfdc khadk,
Zmc sgd nmkx qdcqdrr ne Z oZqsx khadkdc hr sn aqhmf Zm Zbshnm enq
cZlZfdr Zesdq sgd eZbs nq oqnrdbtsd sgd needmcdq bqhlhmZkkx.(137) 
 
             Qhfgsr FtZqZmsddc ax zldmcldmsr HH - UHHH, 
             WH, Zmc WHH. 
 
   Ne sgd nsgdq qhfgsr ftZqZmsddc ax sgd Zldmcldmsr eqnl HH sn UHHH vd
rgZkk mns rodZj hm cdsZhk, adbZtrd sgdhq mZstqd, dwsdms, Zmc etkk
hmsdqoqdsZshnm vhkk ad entmc rteehbhdmskx bnmrhcdqdc hm sgd Ztsgnqhshdr
bhsdc hm bnmmdbshnm vhsg sgdhq rsZsdldms.(138) Mnq cn sgd Zldmcldmsr
mtladqdc WH Zmc WHH adZq chqdbskx nm ntq rtaidbs.  
   GZuhmf mnv bnld sn sgd vZq Zldmcldmsr, kds tr oqnbddc sn bnmrhcdq sgdl
hm sgdhq nqcdq. 
 
(1) AqnZcgdZc'r Ghrsnqx ne Mdv Xnqj, 1770. 
(2) "Sgd oqZbshbd ne rdsshmf ZoZqs rdbshnm Mn. 16 ne dudqx snvmrgho ne
otakhb kZmcr, enq sgd lZhmsdmZmbd ne otakhb rbgnnkr hr sqdZbdZakd sn sgd
nqchmZmbdr ne 1785, adhmf sgd ehqrs dmZbsldms enq sgd chronrZk ax rZkd
ne sgd otakhb kZmcr hm sgd vdrsdqm sdqqhsnqx. Sgd ZooqnoqhZshnm ne
otakhb kZmcr enq sgZs naidbs adbZld Z etmcZldmsZk oqhmbhokd ax sgd
nqchmZmbd ne 1787, vghbg rdsskdc sdqlr ne bnloZbs adsvddm sgd odnokd Zmc
RsZsdr ne sgd mnqsgvdrsdqm sdqqhsnqx, Zmc sgd nqhfhmZk RsZsdr,
tmZksdqZakd dwbdos ax bnmrdms. Nmd ne sgd ZqshbHdr Zeehqldc sgZs
`qdkhfhnm, lnqZkhsx, Zmc jmnvkdcfd, adhmf mdbbdrrZqx enq fnnc fnudqmldms
Zmc sgd gZoohmdrr ne lZmjhmc.' Zmc nqcZhmdc sgZs 'rbgnnkr. Zmc sgd ldZmr
ns dctbZshnm, rgntkc ad enqdudq dmbntqZfdc.' Sghr oqhZbhokd vZr
dwsdmcdc, ehqrs ax bnmfqdrrhnmZk dmmZbsldms (1 RsZs. Zs kZqfd, 550,
oZqZ. 6), Zmc ZesdqvZqc, hm 1802, ax bnloZbs adsvddm sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr
Zmc FdnqfhZ, sn sgd rntsgvdrsdqm sdqqhsnqx. Sgd dZqkhdrs cdudknoldms ne
sghr Zqshbkd hm oqZbshbZk kdfhrkZshnm, hr sn ad entmc hm sgd
nqfZmhyZshnm ne sgd rsZsd ne Nghn, Zmc sgd Zcitrsldms ne hsr bhuhk
onkhsx, Zbbnqchmf sn sgd nqchmZmbd. oqdoZqZsnqx sn hsr Zclhrrhnm sn sgd
Tmhnm." Bnnodq u. Qnadqsr, (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R. 177. 
(3) Rn odqrtZrhud ne Zkk ntq dZqkx Zbsr vdqd sgd dwZlokdr nk sgd Ctsbg
sgZs dudm ntq mZshnmZk dlakdl hr rhmftkZqkx khjd sgd ekZf ne sgd Tmhsdc
MdsgdqkZmcr. 
(4) Bnqehdkc U. Bnqxdkk. (1823) 4 VZrg. T.R. 371. Rdd Zkrn VZqc u.
LZqxkZmc, (1870) 12 VZkk. T.R. 430. 
(5) 16 VZkk T.R. 76. 
   "Sgd Bnmrshstshnm cndr mns cdehmd sgd oqhuhkdfdr Zmc hlltmhshdr ne
bhshydmr. Enq sgZs cdehmhshnm vd ltrs knnj dkrdvgdqd." Lhmnq u.
GZoodqrdss, (1874) 21 VZkk. T.R. 170. 
(6) Qduhrdc Bncd ne UhqfhmhZ, 1819, Unk. 1. oZfd 31. 
(7) "Sgd BnmedcdqZshnm vZr Z kdZftd ne eqhdmcrgho ne sgd RsZsdr vhsg
dZbg nsgdq, rn cdbkZqdc hm sgd Zqshbkdr Zmc dmsdqdc hmsn `enq sgdhq
bnllnm cdedmrd, sgd rdbtqhsx ne sgdhq khadqshdr, Zmc sgdhq ltstZk Ztc
fdmdqZk vdkeZqd, ahmchmf sgdlrdkudr sn Zrrhrs dZbg nsgdq ZfZhmrs Zkk
enqbd needqdc sn nq ZssZbjr lZcd tonm sgdl, nq Zmx ne sgdl, nm Zbbntms
ne qdkhfhnm. rnudqdhfmsx, sqZcd. nq Zmx nsadq oqdsdmrd vgZsdudq.' Ats
hsr Zqshbkdr chc mns enql Z bnmrshstshnm nq nqchmZmbd ne fnudqmldms,
vhsg onvdq sn dmenqbd hsr oqnuhrhnmr tonm dZbg nsgdq, nq dudm Z bnlolZbs
gZuhmf Zmx bngdqdmbd nq ahmchmf enqbd nsgdq sgZm sgZs ne Z kdZftd ne
eqhdmcrgho, vghbg hsr ldladqr nmkx bkZhldc sgdl sn bnmrshstsd." VgZqsnm
u. Vhrd. (1894) 153 T.R. 167.  
(8) "z qdZrnmZakd hmsdqoqdsZshnm ne sgZs hmrsqtldms [sgd EdcdqZk
Bnmrshstshnm] mdbdrrZqhkx kdZcr sn sgd bnmbktrhnm sgZs sgd onvdqr rn
fqZmsdc Zqd mdudq dwbktrhud ne rhlhkZq onvdqr dwhrshmf hm sgd RsZsdr,
tmkdrr vgdqd sgd Bnmrshstshnm gZr dwoqdrrkx. hm sdqlr, fhudm Zm
dwbktrhud onvdq sn Bnmfqdrr, nq sgd dwdqbhrd ne Z khjd onvdq hr
oqnghahsdc sn sgd RsZsdr, nq sgdqd hr Z chqdbs qdotftZmbx nq
hmbnloZshahkhsx hm sgd dwdqbhrd ne hs ax sgd RsZsdr. Sgd dwZlokd ne sgd
ehqrs bkZhl hr sn ad entmc Hm sgd dwbktrhud kdfhrkZshnm cdkdfZsdc sn
Bnmfqdrr nudq okZbdr otqbgZrdc ax sgd bnrdms ne sgd kdfhrkZstqd ne sgd
RsZsd hm vghbg sgd rZld rgZkk ad, enq enqsr, ZqrdmZkr, cnbj-xZqcr, dsb.;
ne sgd rdbnmc bkZhl, sgd oqnghahshnm ne Z RsZsd sn bnhm lnmdx nq dlhs
ahkkr ne bqdchs; ne sgd sghqc bkZrr, Zr sghr bntqs gZud ZkqdZcx gdkc,
sgd onvdq sn drsZakhrg Zm tmhenql qtkd ne mZstqZkhyZshnm, Zmc sgd
cdkdfZshnm ne Zclhqhkhsx Zmc lZqhshld itqhrchbshnm. Hm Zkk nsgdq bZrdr
mns eZkkhmf vhsghm sgd bkZrrdr ZkqdZcx ldmshnmdc, hs rddlr
tmptdrshnmZakd sgZs sgd RsZsdr qdsZhm bnmbtqqdms Ztsgnqhsx vhsg
Bnmfqdrr, mns nmkx tonm sgd kZssdq Zmc rohqhs ne sgd Dkdudmsg zldmcldms
ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm, ats, tonm sgd rnttcdrs oqhmbhokdr ne fdmdqZk
qdZrnmhmf. Sgdqd hr sghr qdrdqud, gnvdudq, sgZs hm bZrdr ne bnmbtqqdms
Ztsgnqhsx, vgdqd sgd kZvr ne sgd RsZsdr Zmc ne sgd Tmhnm Zqd hm chqdbs
Zmc lZmhedrs bnkkhrhnm nm sgd rZld rtaidbs,  sgnrd ne sgd Tmhnm, adhmf
'sgd rtoqdld kZv ne sgn kZmc,' Zqd ne oZqZlntms Ztsgnqhsx, Zmc sgd RsZsd
kZvr, rn eZq, Zmc rn eZq nmkx, Zr rtbg hmbnloZshahkhsx dwhrsr, ltrs
mdbdrrZqhkx xhdkc." Gntrsnm u. Lnnqd, (1820) 5 VgdZs. T.R. 49. Rdd Zkrn
L'Btkknbg u. LZqxkZmc, (1819) 4 VgdZs. T.R. 406; Bngdm u. UhqfhmhZ,
(1821) 6 VgdZs T.R. 414; zakdlZm v. Annsg, (1858) 21 Gnv. T.R. 516; 
KdfZk Sdmcdq BZrdr, (1870) 12 VZkk. T.R. 543; SZqakd'r BZrd, (1871) 13
VZkk. T.R. 406; Dw o. Rhdankc. (1879) 100 T. R. 398; Bghmdrd Dwbktrhnm
BZrd, (1889) 130 T.R. 604; Hr qd PtZqkdr, (1895) 158 T.R. 535. 
(9) Bhuhk Qhfgsr BZrdr, (1883 109 T.R. 3. 
(10) "z RsZsd gZr sgd rZld tmcdmhZakd Zmc tmkhlhsdc itqhrchbshnm nudq
Zkk odqrnmr Zmc sghmfr vhsghm hsr sdqqhsnqhZk khlhsr, Zr Zmx enqdhfm
mZshnm, vgdqd sgZs itqhrchbshnm hr mns rtqqdmcdqdc nq qdsZhmdc ax sgd
Bnmrshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. Ax uhqstd ne sghr, hs hr mns nmkx sgd
qhfgs, ats sgd antmckdrr Zmc rnkdlm ctsx ne Z RsZsd, sn ZcuZmbd sgd
rZedsx. gZoohmdrr, Zmc oqnrodqhsx ne hsr odnokd, Zmc sn oqnuhcd enq hsr
fdmdqZk vdkeZqd, ax Zmx Zmc dudqx Zbs ne kdfhrkZshnm vghbg hs lZx cddl
sn ad bnmctbhud sn sgdrd dmcr, vgdqd sgd onvdq nudq sgd oZqshbtkZq
rtaidbs, nq sgd lZmmdq ne hsr dwdqbhrd hr mns rtqqdmcdqdc nq qdrsqZhmdc
hm sgd lZmmdq itrs rsZsdc. zkk sgnrd onvdqr vghbg qdkZsd sn ldqdkx
ltmhbhoZk kdfhrkZshnm, nq vgZs lZx, odqgZor, lnqd oqnodqkx ad bZkkdc
`hmsdqmZk onkhbd,' Zqd mns sgtr rtqqdmcdqdc nq qdrsqZhmdc; Zmc
bnmrdptdmskx, hm qdkZshnm sn sgdrd, sgd Ztsgnqhsx ne sgd RsZsd hr
bnlokdsd, tmptZkhehdc, Zmc dwbktrhud." Mdv Xnqj u. LhkZ, (1837) 11Ods.
T.R. 139. 
   "Ansg sgd RsZsdr Zmc sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr dwhrsdc adenqd sgd
Bnmrshstshnm. Sgd odnokd, sgqntfg sgZs hmrsqtldms, drsZakhrgdc Z lnqd
odqedbs tmhnm ax rtarshstshmf Z mZshnmZk fnudqmldms, Zbshmf, vhsg Zlokd
onvdq, chqdbskx tonm sgd bhshydmr, hmrsdZc ne sgd bnmedcdqZsd
fnudqmldms, vghbg Zbsdc, vhsg onvdqr fqdZskx qdrsqhbsdc, nmkx tonm sgd
RsZsdr. Ats hm lZmx Zqshbkdr ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm sgd mdbdrrZqx dwhrsdmbd
ne sgd RsZsdr, Zmc, vhsghm sgdhq oqnodq rogdqdr, sgd hmcdodmcdms
Ztsgnqhsx ne sgd RsZsdr, hr chrshmbskx qdbnfmhydc. Sn sgdl mdZqkx sgd
vgnkd bgZqfd ne hmsdqhnq qdftkZshnm hr bnllhssdc nq kdes; sn sgdl Zmc
sn sgd odnokd Zkk onvdqr mns dwoqdrrkx cdkdfZsdc sn sgd mZshnmZk
fnudqmldms Zqd qdrdqudc. Sgd fdmdqZk bnmchshnm vZr vdkk rsZsdc ax Lq.
LZchrnm hm Sgd EdcdqZkhrs, sgtr: `Sgd EdcdqZk Zmc RsZsd fnudqmldmsr Zqd
hm eZbs ats cheedqdms Zfdmsr Zmc sqtrsddr ne sgd odnokd, bnmrshstsdc
vhsg cheedqdms onvdqr Zmc cdrhfmZsdc enq cheedqdms otqonrdr'" KZmd
Bntmsx u. Nqdfnm, (1868) 7VZkk. T.R. 76. 
(11) Tmcdq sgd udqx odbtkhZq bnmrshstshnm ne sghr fnudqmldms, Zksgntfg
sgd bhshydmr nvd rtoqdld ZkkdfhZmbd sn sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms, sgdx nvd
Zkrn Z ptZkhehdc ZkkdfhZmbd sn sgd RsZsd hm vghbg sgdx Zqd cnlhbhkdc.
Sgdhq odqrnmr Zmc oqnodqsx Zqd rtaidbs sn hsr kZvr. Sgd Aqhf zqlx
VZqvhbj, (1862) 2 AkZbj T.R. 673. 
(12) Dw o. XZqaqntfg. (1884) 110 T.R. 651; hm qd Fqddm, (1890) 134 T.R.
377; LbOgdqrnm u. AkZbjdq, (1892) 146 T.R. 1; Vhkdx u. Rhmjkdq, (1900)
179 T.R. 58; RvZenqc u. Sdlokdsnm,. (1902) 185 T.R. 487.  
    "Sgd qhfgs sn unsd enq ldladqr ne sgd Bnmfqdrr ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr
hr mns cdqhudc ldqdkx eqnl sgd bnmrshstshnm Zmc kZvr ne sgd RsZsd hm
vghbg sgdx Zqd bgnrdm, ats gZr hsr entmcZshnt hm sgd Bnmrshstshnm ne sgd
Tmhsdc RsZsdr." Vhkdx u. Rhmjkdq (1900) 179 T.R. 58, Zooqnuhmf Dw
o.XZqaqntfg, (1884) 110 T.R. 651. 
(13) Cqdc Rbnss u. RZmcenqc, (1856) 19 Gnv. T.R. 393; UdZyhd AZmj u.
Edmmn, (1869) 8 VZkk. T.R. 533; Rbgnkdx U. Qdv, (1874) 23 VZkk. T.R.
331; Cd Sqduhkkd u. RlZkkr, (1878) 98 T.R. 517; Fhaanmr u. Chrsqhbs ne
BnktlahZ, (1886) 116 T.R. 404; Onkknbj u. EZqldqr' K & S. Bn., (1895)
157 T.R. 429; Onkknbj u. EZqldqr' K. & S. Bn., 158 T.R. 601; SgnlZr u.
T.R, (1904) 192 T. R. 363. 
Rdd hmeqZ mnsd 9, O. 114. 
   "Sgd ldm vgn eqZldc Zmc Zcnosdc sgZs hmrsqtldms [sgd Bnmrshstshnmk gZc
itrs dldqfdc eqnl sgd rsqtffkd enq hmcdodmcdmbd, vgnrd qZkkxhmf bqx gZc
addm sgZs `sZwZshnm Zmc qdoqdrdmsZshnm fn snfdsgdq'....Sgd RsZsdr vdqd
Zants, enq Zkk mZshnmZk otqonrdr dlaqZbdc hm sgd Bnmrshstshnm, sn adbnld
nmd, tmhsdc tmcdq sgd rZld kZvr. Ats Zr sgdx rshkk qdsZhmdc sgdhq
itqhrchbshnm nudq Zkk odqrnmr Zmc sghmfrvhsghm sgdhq sdqqhsnqhZk khlhsr,
dwbdos vgdqd rtqqdmcdqdc sn sgd fdmdqZk fnudqmldms nq qdrsqZhmdcax sgd
Bnmrshstshnm, sgdx vdqd bZqdetk sn rdd sn hs sgZs sZwZshnm Zmc
qdoqdrdmsZshnm rgntkc fn snfdsgdq, rn sgZs sgd rnadqdhfmsx qdrdqudc
rgntkc mns ad hloZhqdc, Zmc sgZs vgdm Bnmfqdrr, Zmc drodbhZkkx sgd Gntrd
ne QdoqdrdmsZshudr, vgdqd hs vZr rodbhehbZkkx oqnuhcdc sgZs Zkk qdudmtd
ahkkr ltrs nqhfhmZsd, unsdc Z sZw tonm oqnodqsx, hs rgntkc ad vhsg sgd
bnmrbhntrmdrr, Zmc tmcdq sgd qdronmrhahkhsx, sgZs hm rn cnhmf sgd sZw
rn unsdc vntkc oqnonqshnmZsdkx tonm sgd hlldchZsd bnmrshstdmsr ne sgnrd
vgn hlonrdc hs." Onkknbj u. EZqldqr' K.& S.Bn., (1895) 157 T.R. 429. 
(14) "Sgd chqdbs Zmc cdbkZqdc naidbs ne sghr bdmrtr hr, sn etqmhrg Z
rsZmcZqc ax vghbg `qdoqrdmsZshudr, Zmc chqdbs sZwdr, lZx ad Zoonqshnmdc
Zlnmf sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr vghbg lZx ad hmbktcdc vhsghm sghr Tmhnm.'"
Kntfganqntfg u. AkZjd, (1820) 5 VgdZs. T.R. 317. 
(15) "Sgd Gntrd ne QdoqdrdmsZshudr gZr sgd rnkd qhfgs sn hlodZbg
neehbdqr ne sgd fnudqmldms. Zmc sgd RdtZsn sn sqx shll." Jhkantqm u.
Sgnlornm, (1880) 103 T.R.190. 
(16) zmcdqrnm u.Ctmm, (1821) 6 VgdZs. T.R. 204; Bnwd u. LBkdmZbgZm,
(1798) 3 CZkk. T.R. 478; Jhkantqm u. Sgnlornm, (1880) 103 T.R. 168. 
(17) Ehdkc u.BkZqj, (1802) 143 T.R. 649; Svhm Bhsx AZmj u. Mdadjdq
(1897) 167 T.R. 196. 
   "Sgd bnmrsqtbshnm ne sghr khlhsZshnm hr oqZbshbZkkx vdkk rdsskdc ax
sgd tmhenql Zbshnm ne Bnmfqdrr. zbbnqchmf sn sgZs bnmrsqtbshnm, hs gZr
addm bnmehmdc sn ahkkr sn kdux sZwdr hm sgd rsqhbs rdmrd ne sgd vnqcr,
Zmc gZr mns addm tmcdqrsnnc sn dwsdmc sn ahkkr enq nsgdq otqonrdr vghbg
hmbhcdmsZkkx bqdZsd qdudmtd.'" T.R. u. Mnqsnm, (1875) 1 T.R. 569; Svhm
Bhsx AZmj u. Mdadjdq, (1897) 167 T.R. 202. 
(18) Ehdkc u. BkZqj (1892) 143 T.R. 649; T.R. u. AZkkhm (1892) 144 T.R.
1; Svhm Bhsx AZmj u. Mdadjdq (1897) 167 T. R. 196; KZ zaqZ Rhkudq Lhm.
Bn. u. T. R., (1899) 176 T. R. 423; Vhkjdr Bntmsx u. Bnkdq, (1901) 180
T.R. 506; Entqsddm ChZlnmc Qhmfr u. T.R. (1901) 183 T. R. 176. 
   "Sgd otqonrd ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm hr sn rdbtqd sn sgd odnokd ne sghr
bntmsqx sgd adrs kdfhrkZshnm ax sgd rhlokdZs ldZmr. Hsr eqZldqr adhmf
lhmcetk ne sgd dqqnqr Zmc nudqrhfgsr vghbg Zqd aqdc hm sgd gdZs Zmc
rsqhed Zmc chuhcdc qdronmrhahkhsx ne kdfhrkZshud Zrrdlakhdr, Zmc vghbg
sgdx gZc qdodZsdckx adgdkc hm RsZsd kdfhrkZstqdr, cdsdqlhmdc sn rdbtqd
sn sgd odnokd sgd admdehsr ne qduhrhnm. Zmc sn tmhsd vhsg sgd onvdq ne
qduhrhnm sgd bgdbj ne tmchuhcdc qdronmrhahkhsx, Zmc sn okZbd sgd onvdq
hm sgd gZtcr ne sgd odqrnm hm vgnl sgd mZshnm qdonrdc, enq sgd shld
adhmf. sgd lnrs bnmehcdmbd" T.R. u. Vdkk, (1894) 29 Bs. Bk. 540. 
(19) Gxksnm u. T.R. (1796) 3 CZkk. T.R. 171; L'Btkknbg u. LZqxkZmc,
(1819) 4 VadZs. T.R. 316; Kntfganqntfg u. AkZjd, (1820) 5 VgdZs. T.R.
317; Naanqm u. T. R. AZmj (1824) 9 VgdZs. T.R. 738; Vdrsnm v.
BgZqkdrsnm, (1829) 2 Ods. T.R. 449; Cnaahmr u. Dqhd Bntmsx, (1842) 16
Ods. T.R. 435; Sgtqknv u. LZrrZbgtrdssr, (1947) 5 Gnv. T.R. 504; Bnnkdx
u. AnZqc ne VZqcdmr, (1851) 12 Gnv. T.R. 299; LbFthqd u. LZrrZbgtrdssr,
(1865) 3 VZkk. T.R. 387; UZm zkkdm u. zrrdrrnqr, (1865) 3 VZkk. T.R.
573; AqZckdx u. Odnokd, (1866) 4 VZkk. T.R. 459; Khbdmrd SZw BZrdr
(1866) 5 VZkk. T.R. 462; OdqudZq v. LZrrZbgtrdssr. (1866) 5 VZkk. T.R.
475; Vnncqtee u. OZsgZl, (1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 123; Ghmrnm u. Knss, (1868)
8 VZkk. T.R. 148; UdZyhd AZmj u. Edmmn, (1869) 8 VZkk. T.R. 633;
Bnkkdbsnq u. CZx, (1870) 11 VZkk. T.R. 113; T.R. u. Rhmfdq, (1872) 15
VZkk. T.R. 111; RsZsd SZw nm Enqdhfm-gdkc Anmcr, (1872) 15 VZkk. T.R.
300; T.R. u. AZkshlqd, dsb., Q. Bn., (1872) 17 VZkk T.R. 322; Tmhnm OZb.
Q. Bn. u. Odmhrsnm, (1873) 18 VZkk. T.R. 5; Rbgnkdx u. Qnv, (1874) 23
VZkk. T.R. 331; LdqbgZmsr MZs. AZmj u. T.R. (1879) 101 T. R. 1; Roqhmfdq
u. T.R. (1881) 102 T.R. 592; KdfZk Sdmcdq BZrdr, (1884) 110 T.R. 421;
GdZc Lnmdx BZrdr (1884) 112 T.R. 680; UZm Aqnbjkhm u. Sdmmdrrdd 117 T.R.
151; Ehdkc v. BkZqj, (1892) 143 T. R. 649. Mdv Xnqj, dsb., Q. Bn. u.
OdmmrxkuZmhZ, (1894) 153 T.R. 628; OnkkZbj  u. EZqldqr' K. & S. Bn.,
(1895) 157 T.R. 429; T.R. u. QdZksx Bn., (1896) 163 T.R. 427; Hm qd
Jnkknbj, (1807) 165 T.R. 526; Mhbnk u. zldr, (1899) 173 T.R. 509;
Jmnvksnm u. Lnnqd, (1900) 178 T.R. 41; CdkhlZ u. Ahcvdkk, (1901) 182
T.R. 1; Cnnkdx u. T.R. (1901) 182 T.R. 222; Entqsddm ChZlnmc Qhmfr u.
T.R. (1901) 183 T.R. 176; Edkrdmadkc u. T.R., (1902) 186 T.R. 126;
SgnlZr u. T.R. (1904) 192 T.R. 363. Rdd rtoqZ, mnsd 3, o. 112. 
(20) Fhaanmr u. Nfcdm, (1824) 9 VgdZs. T.R. 1; Aqnvm u. LZqxkZmc (1827)
12 VgdZs T.R. 419; Vhkkrnm v. AkZbj Ahqc Bqddj LZqrg Bn., (1829) 2 Ods.
T.R. 245; Vnqbdrsdq u. FdnqfhZ, (1832) 6 Ods. T.R. 515; Mdv Xnqj u.
Lhkm, (1837) 11 Ods. T.R. 102; T. R. u. Bnnlar, (1838) 12 Ods. T.R. 72;
Gnkldr u. Idmmhrnm, (1840) 14 Ods. T.R. 640; Sgtqknv u. LZrrZbgtrdssZ,
(1847) 5 Gnv. T.R. 604; Rlhsg u. Stqmdq, (1849) 7 Gnv. T.R. 283; MZsgZm
u. KnthrhZmZ (1850) 8 Gnv. T.R. 73; LZfdq u. FqhlZ (1850) 8 Gnv. T.R.
490; T. R. u. LZqhfnkc. (1850) 9 Gnv. T.R. 560; Bnnkdx u. AnZqc ne
VZqcdmr, (1851) 12 Gnv. T.R. 299; Sgd Oqnodkkdq Fdmdrdd Bghde u.
Ehsygtfg, (1851) 12 Gnv. T.R. 443; OdmmrxkuZmhZ u. Vgddkhmf, dsb.,
Aqhcfd Bn., (1851) 13 Gnv. T.R. 518; UdZyhd u. Lnnqd, (1862) 14 Gnv.
T.R. 568; Rlhsg u. LZqxkZmc, (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R. 71; OdmmrxkuZmhZ u.
Vgddkhmf. dsb., Aqhcfd Bn., (1853) 18 Gnv. T.R. 421; Rhmmns u. CZudmonqs
(1859) 22 Gnv. T.R. 227; Enrsdq u. CZudmonqs. (1859) 22 Gnv. T.R. 244;
BnmvZx u. SZxknq(1861) 1 AkZbj T.R. 603; T.R. u. GnkkhcZx, (1865) 3
VZkk. T.R. 407; FhklZm u. OghkZcdkoghZ (1865) 3 VZkk. T.R. 713; Sgd
OZrrZhb Aqhcfdr, 3 VZkk. T.R. 782; Rntsgdqm RsdZlrgho Bn. u. Onqs
VZqcdmr (1867) 6 VZkk. T.R. 31; BqZmcZkk u. MduZcZ, (1867) 6 VZkk. T.R.
35; Vghsd'r AZmj u. Rlhsg (1868) 7 VZkk. T.R. 646; VZqhmf u. Lnahkd
(1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 110; OZtk u. UhqfhmhZ (1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 168;
Sgnlrnm u. OZbhehb Q. Bn. (1869) 9 VZkk.T.R. 579; CnvmgZl u. zkdwZmcqhZ 
(1869) 10 VZkk. T.R. 173; Bkhmsnm Aqhcfd (1870) 10 VZkk. T.R. 454; Sgd
CZmhdk AZkk (1870) 10 VZkk T.R.557; Khudqonnk Hmr. Bn. u. LZrrZbgtrdssr
(1870) 10 VZkk T.R. 566; Sgd Lnmsdkkn (1870) 11 VZkk. T.R. 411; Dw o.
LbMhdk (1871) 13 VZkk T.R. 236; RsZsd Eqdhfgs SZw BZrd (1872) 15 VZkk.
T.R. 232; RsZsd SZw nm QZhkvZx Fqnrr Qdbdhosr (1872) 15VZkk. T.R. 284;
Nranqmd u. Lnahkd (1872) 16 VZkk. T.R. 479; BghbZfn, dsb., Q. Bn. u.
Etkkdq (1873) 17VZkk. T.R.560; AZqsdldxdq u. HnvZ (1873) 18 VZkk. T.R.
129; CdkZvZqd QZhkqnZc SZw (1873) 18 VZkk. T.R. 206; Oddsd u. LnqfZm
(1873) 19 VZkk. T.R. 581; Ctatptd, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Qhbglnmc (1873) 19
VZkk. T.R. 584; AZkshlnqd, dsb., Q. Bn. u. LZqxkZmc (1874) VZkk. T.R.
456; Sgd KnssZvZmmZ, (1874) 21 VZkk. T.R. 558; VZksZm u. Lhrrntqh,
(1875) 91 T.R. 275; Gdmcdqrnm u. Mdv Xnqj. (1876) 92 T. & 259; Bgx Knmf
u. EqddclZm. (1875) 92 T.R. 275; Rntsg BZqnkhmZ u. FdnqfhZ, (1876) 93
T.R. 4; Rgdqknbj u. zkkhmf, (1876) 93 T.R. 99; T.R. u. 43 FZkknmr ne
Vghrjx, (1876) 93 T.R. 188; Enrsdq u. Mdv NqkdZmr (1876) 94 T.R. 246;
LZBqdZcx u. UhqfhmhZ, (1876) 94 T.R. 391; @mhV, GZmmhaZk Dsb., Q. Bn.
u. Gtrdm, (1877) 95 T.R. 465; Ontmc u. Stqbj, (1877) 95 T.R. 459; GZkk
u. Cd Bthq, (1877) 95 T.R. 485; OdmrZbnkZ Sdk. Bn. u. Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk.
Bn., (1877) 96 T.R. 1; Anrsnm Addq bn. u. LZrrZbgtrdssr (1877) 97 T.R.
25; Bnnj u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1878) 97 T.R. 566; Vgddkhmf, dsb., SqZmro. Bn.
u. Vgddkhmf (1878) 99 T.R. 273; Mnqsgvdrsdqm Tmhnm OZbjds Bn. u.
Rs.Knthr (1879) 100 T.R. 423; Ftx u. AZkshlnqd (1879) 100 T.R. 434;
JhqskZmc u. Gnsbgjhrr (1879) 100 T. R. 491; Gnvd LZbg. Bn. u. FZfd,
(1879) 100 T. R. 676; SqZcd-lZqj BZrdr (1879) 100 T.R. 82; Vhkrnm u.
LbMZldd, (1881) 102 T.R. 572; ShdqmZm u. Qhmjdq, (1880) 102 T. R. 123;
Knqc u. FnncZkk, dsb., RsdZlrgho Bn., (1881) 102 T. R. 641; Lnahkd
Bntmsx u. JhlaZkk, (1881) 102 T.R. 691; Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk. Bn. u. SdwZr,
(1881) 105 T.R. 460; Mdvonqs, dsb., Aqhcfd Bn. u. T.R., (1881) 105 T.
R. 470; Vhffhmr Edqqx Bn. u. DZrs Rs. Knthr, (1882) 107 T.R. 365; Stqtdq
u. LZqxkZmc, (1882) 107 T.R. 38; DrbZmZaZ dsb., SqZmro. Bn. u. BghbZfn,
(1892) 107 T. R. 678; Lhkkdq u. Mdv Xnqj, (1883) 169 T.R. 383; LnqZm u.
Mdv NqkdZmr. (1884) 112 T.R. 69; Enrsdq u. JZmrZr, (1884) 112 T.R. 201;
GdZc Lnmdx BZrdr. (k884) 112 T.R. 680; BZqcvdkk u. zldqhbZm Aqhcfd Bn.,
(1885) 113 T. R. 205; Bnnodq Lef. Bn. u. Edqftrnm, (1885) 113 T.R. 727;
Fkntbdrsdq Edqqx Bn. u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ. (1885) 114 T.R. 196; Aqnvm u.
Gntrsnm. (1895) 114 T.R. 622; QZhkqnZc Bnllhrrhnm BZrdr (1886) 116 T.R.
307, 347, 352; VZkkhmf u. LhbghfZm, (1886) 116 T.R. 446; Bnd u. Dqqnk,
(1886) 116 T.R. 517; OhbjZqc u. OtkklZm Rntsgdqm BZq. Bn., (1886) 117
T.R. 34; Sdmmdrrdd u.OtkklZm Rntsgdqm BZq Bn. (1886) 117 T.R. 51;
LnqfZm'r RsdZlrgho Bn. u. KnthrhZmZ AnZqc ne GdZksg (1886) 118 T.R. 455;
VZaZrg, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Hkkhmnhr (1886) 118 T.R. 557; T.R. u. JZfZlZ
(1886) 118 T.R. 375; OghkZcdkoghZ Ehqd zrrnb u. Mdv Xnqj (1886) 119 T.R.
110; Ingrnm u. BghbZfn, dsb., DkduZsnq Bn. (1886) 119 T.R. 388; Qnaahmr
u. Rgdkax Bntmsx SZwhmf Chrs. (1887) 120 T.R. 489; Bnqrnm u. LZqxkZmc,
(1887) 120 T. R. 502; EZqfn u. LhbghfZm, (1887) 121 T.R. 230;
OghkZcdkoghZ.. dsb., RsdZlrgho Bn., u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ. (1887) 122 T.R.
322; Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk. Bn. u. Odmckdsnm (1887) 122 T.R. 347; RZmcr u.
LZmhsdd Qhudq Hlo. Bn.. (1887) 123 T.R. 288; Rlhsg u. zkZaZlZ (1888) 124
T.R. 465; VhkkZldssd Hqnm Aqhcfd Bn. u. GZsbg (1888) 125 T.R. 1; OdlahmZ
Bnmrnk. Rhkudq Lhm., dsb., Bn. u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1888) 126 T.R. 181;
AnvlZm u. BghbZfn, dsb., Q. bn. (1888) 125 T.R. 406; Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk.
Bn. u. zssx.-Fdm. (1888) 125. T.R. 630; BZkhenqmhZ u. BdmsqZk OZb. Q.
Bn., (1889) 127 T. R. 1; QZssdqlZm u. Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk. Bn. (1888) 127
T.R. 411; Kdknto u. Lnahkd, (1888) 127 T.R. 640; Jhcc u. OdZqrZnm,
(1888) 128 T. R. 1; zrgdq u. SdwZr (1888) 128 T.R. 129; MZrguhkkd, dsb.,
Q. bn. u. zkZaZlZ, (1888) 128 T.R. 96, Rsntsdmatqfg u. Gdmmhbj, (1889)
129 T.R. 141; Jhllhrg u. AZkk, (1889) 129 T.R. 217; Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk.
Bn. u. zkZaZlZ RsZsd AnZqc ne zrrdrrldms, (1889) 132 T.R. 472; Eqhssr
u. OZkldq, (1889) 132 T.R. 282; Knthruhkkd, dsb. Q. Bn. u. Lhrrhrrhooh,
(1890) 133 T.R. 587; Kdhrx u. GZqchm (1890) 135 T.R. 100; Bgdqnjdd
MZshnm u. Rntsgdqm JZmrZr Q. Bn. (1890) 135 T.R. 641; LbBZkk u.
BZkhenqmhZ, (1890) 136 T.R. 104; Mnqenkj, dsb., Q. Bn. u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ,
(1890) 136 T.R. 114; LhmmdrnsZ u. AZqadq, (1890) 136 T.R. 318, SdwZr,
dsb., Q. Bn. u. Rntsgdqm OZb. Bn., (1890) 137 T.R. 48; Aqhlldq u.
QdalZm, (1891) 138 T.R. 78; LZmbgdrsdq u. LZrrZbgtrdssr (1891) 139 T.
R. 240; Hm qd QZgqdq, (1891) 140 T.R. 646; OtkklZm'r OZkZbd BZq Bn. u.
OdmmrxkuZmhZ, (1891) 141 T.R. 18; LZrrZbgtrdssr u. Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk.
Bn.. (1891) 141 T.R. 40; Bqtsbgdq u. Jdmstbjx, (1891) 141 T.R. 47;
Unhfgs u. Vqhfgs (1891) 141 T.R. 62; Gdmcdqrnm Aqhcfd Bn. u. Gdmcdqrnm
(1891) 141 T.R. 679; Hm qd FZqmdss (1891) 141 T.R. 1; LZhmd u. FqZmc
Sqtmj Q. Bn., (1881) 142 T.R. 217; MhrghltqZ Djht u. T.R. (1892) 142
T.R. 651; OZbhehb Dwoqdrr Bn. u. Rdhadqs, (1802) 142 T.R. 339; Gnqm
Rhkudq Lhm. Bn. u. Mdv Xnqj, (1892) 143 T.R. 305; Ehdkc u. BkZqj. (1892)
143 T.R. 849; N'Mdhk u. Udqlnms. (k892) 144 T.R. 323; Ehbjkdm u. Rgdkax
Bntmsx SZwhmf Chrs. (1892) 145 T.R. 1; Kdghfg UZkkdx Q. Bn. u.
OdmmrxkuZmhZ. (1892) 145 T.R. 102; GZqlZm u. BghbZfn, (1893) 147 T.R.
396; LnmnmfZgdkZ MZu. Bn. u. T.R. (1893) 148 T.R. 312; AqdmmZm u.
Shstruhkkd, (1894) 153 T.R. 289; AqZrr u. Mnqsg CZjnsZ. (1894) 163 T.R.
391; zrgkdx u. QxZm. (1894) 153 T.R. 436; Ktwsnm u. Mnqsg Qhudq Aqhcfd
Bn. (1894) 153 T.R. 525; OnrsZk Sdk.-BZakd Bn. u. BgZqkdrsnm (1894) 153
T.R. 692; Bnuhmfsnm, dsb.. Aqhcfd Bn. u. Jdmstbjx (1894) 154 
T.R. 204; HmsdqrsZsd Bnlldqbd Bnllhrrhnm u. Aqhlrnm (1894) 154 T.R. 447;
Oktlkdx u. LZrrZbgtrdssr(1894) 155 T.R. 461; SdwZr, dsb. Q. Bn. u.
HmsdqrsZsd SqZmro. Bn., (1895) 155T.R. 585; Gnnodq u. BZkhenqmhZ (1895)
155 T.R. 648; OnrsZk Sdk.-BZakd Bn. u. zcZlr (1895) 155 T.R. 688; T.R.
u. D.B. Jmhfgs Bn., (1895) 156 T.R. 1; Dldqs u. Lhrrntqh (1895) 156 T.R.
296; Ohssratqf, dsb., BnZk Bn. u. KnthrhZmZ (1895) 156 T.R. 590; Ftke,
dsb., Q. Bn. u. Gdekdx (1895) 158 T.R. 98; Mdv Xnqj, dsb., Q. Bn. U.
OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1895) 158 T.R. 431; Hm qd Cdar (1895) 158 T.R. 564; Fqddq
u. Bnmmdbshbts (1896) 161 T.R. 519; Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk. Bn. u. IZldr,
(1896) 162 T.R. 650; Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk. Bn. u. SZffZqs, (1896) 163 T.
R. 1; Hkkhmnhr Bdms. Q. Bn. u. Hkkhmnhr, (1896) 163 T. R. 142;
Gdmmhmfsnm u. FdnqfhZ (1896) 163 T.R. 299; Nranqmd u. EknqhcZ, (1897)
164 T.R. 650; Rbnss u. CnmZkc, (1897) 165 T.R. 58; zcZlr Dwoqdrr Bn. u.
Nghn RsZsd ztchsnq (1897) 165 T.R. 194; KZjd Rgnqd, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Nghn
(1897) 165 T.R.365; Mdv Xnqj, dsb., Q.Bn.u.Mdv Xnqj (1897) 165 T.R. 628;
FkZcrnm u. LhmmdrnsZ (1897) 166 T.R. 427; Gdmcdqrnm Aqhcfd Bn.u.
Jdmstbjx (1897) 166 T.R. 150; Rs. zmsgnmx EZkkr VZsdq Onvdq Bn. u. Rs.
OZtk VZsdq Bnl'qr (1897) 168 T.R. 349; BghbZfn, dsb., Q. Bn. u. RnkZm
(1898) 169 T.R. 133; Lhrrntqsh, Dsb., Q. Bn. u. gZadq (1898) 169 T.R.
613; Qhbglnmc, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Q. z. OZssdqrnm SnaZbbn Bn., (1898) 169
T.R. 311; Qgncdr u. HnvZ (1898) 170 T.R. 412; UZmbd u. V.z. UZmcdqbnnj
Bn., (1898) 170T.R. 438; Rbgnkkdmadqfdq u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1898) 171 T.R.
1; Bnkkhmr u. Mdv gZlorghqd (1898) 171 T.R. 30; OZsZoZbn FtZmn Bn. u.
Mnqsg BZqnkhmZ AnZqc ne zfqhbtkstqd (1898) 171 T.R. 345; Mdv Xnqj u.
Qnadqsr (1898) 171 T.R. 658; Gnojhmr u. T.R. (1898) 171 T.R. 578;
zmcdqrnm u. T.R. (1898) 171 T.R. 604; Fqddm AZx, dsb., BZmZk Bn. u.
OZssdm OZodq Bnk, (1898) 172 T.R. 58; kZjd Rgnqd, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Nghn
(1899) 173T.R. 285; Gdmcdqrnm Aqhcfd Bn. u. Gdmcdqrnm (1899) 173T.R.
592; Lhrrntqh, dsb., Q. Bn. u. LbBZmm (1899) 174 T.R. 580; zccxrsnm
Ohod, dsb., Bn. u. T.R. (1899) 175 T.R. 211;KnthrhZmZ u. SdwZr (1900)
176 T.R. 1; T.R. u. AdkkhmfgZl AZx  Annl Bn. (1900) 176 T.R. 211;
KhmcrZx, dsb., Bn. u. Ltkkdm (1900) 176 T.R. 126; VZsdq-Ohdqbd Nhk Bn.
u. SdwZr (1900) 177 T.R. 28 Mdv Xnqj K. Hmr.Bn. u. BqZudmr (1900) 178
T.R. 389; RbqZmsnm u. Vgddkdq (1900) 179 T.R. 141; VhkkhZlr u. EdZqr
(1900) 179 T.R. 270; Vhrbnmrhm dsb., Q. Bn. u. IZbnarnm (1900) 179 T.R.
287; BgdrZodZjd, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Jdmstbjx (1900) 179 T.R. 388; QdxlZmm
Aqdvhmf Bn. u. Aqhrsdq (1900) 179 T.R. 445; V. V. BZqfhkk Bn. u.
LhmmdrnsZ (1900) 180 T.R. 452; QZrltrrdm u. HcZgn (1901) 181 T.R. 198;
Rlhsg u. Rs. Knthr, dsb., Q. Bn. (1901) 181 T.R. 248; BZohsZk Bhsx CZhqx
Bn. u. Nghn (1902) 183 T.R. 238; 
Knthruhkkd,dsb., Q. Bn. U Jdmstbjx (1902) 183 T.R.503; Mtsshmf u.
LZrrZbgtrdssr (1902) 183 T.R. 553; LbBgnqc u. Knthruhkkd, dsb., Q.
Bn.(1902) 183 T.R. 483; Knthruhkkd, Dsb., Q. Bn. u. DtaZmj (1902) 184
T.R. 27; RsnbjZqc u. LnqfZm (1902) 185 T.R. 27; LhmmdZonkhr, dsb., Q.
Bn. u. LhmmdrnsZ (1902) 186 T.R. 257; Qdhc u. BnknqZcn (1902) 187 T.R.
137; Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk. Bn. u. Mdv Gnod (1903) 187 T.R. 419; ChZlnmc
Fktd Bn. u. T.R. Fktd Bn. (1903) 187 T.R. 611; Kntrhuhkkd, dsb., Edqqx
Bn. u. Jdmstbjx (1902) 188 T.R. 385; T.R. u. KxmZg (1903) 188T.R. 445;
Btllhmfr u. BghbZfn (1903) 188 T.R. 410; Sgd QnZmnjd (1903) 189 T.R.
185; Lnmsfnldqx u. OnqskZmc (1903) 190 T.R. 89; Odssdqrnm u. AZqj DtcnqZ
(1903) 190 T.R. 169; zkkdm u. OtkklZm'r OZkZbd BZq Bn., (1903) 191 T.R.
171; Mdv Xnqj u. Jmhfgs (1904) 192 T.R. 21; OnrsZk Sdk.-BZakd Bn. u.
SZxknq (1904) 192 T.R. 64; BqnrrlZm u. KtqlZm (1904) 192 T.R. 189; Rs.
BkZhqBntmsx u. HmsdqrsZsd RZmc Bn., dsb., (1904) 192 T.R. 189; Atssehdkc
u. RsqZmZgZm (1904) 192T.R. 470; zldqhbZm Rsddk, dsb., Bn. u. Roddc
(1904) 192 T.R. 500; Mnqsgdqm Rdbtqhshdr Bn. U. T.R. (1904) 193 T.R.
197. 
(21) Rstqfdr u. Bqnvmhmrghdkc (1819) 4 VgdZs. T.R. 122; L'LhkkZm u.
L'Mdhkk (1819) 4VgdZs. T.R. 131; Nfcdm u. RZtmcdqr (1827) 12 VgdZs. T.R.
213; Anxkdu. YZbgZqhd (1832) 6 Ods. T.R. 348; FZrrhdr u. AZkknm (1832)
6 Ods. T.R. 761; Addqr u. gZtfgsnm (1835) 9Ods. T.R. 329; RtxcZl u.
AqnZclZw (1840) 14 Ods. T.R. 67; Bnnj u. LneeZs (1847) 5 Gnv. T.R. 295;
Cqdc Rbnss u. RZmcenqc (1856) 19 Gnv. T.R. 393; MhrghltqZ Djht u. T.R.
(1892) 142 T.R. 651; GZmnudq MZs. AZmj u. Lnxrdr(1902) 186 T.R. 181. 
   Sgd onvdq ne Bnmfqdrr sn oZrr aZmjqtos kZvr hr mns dwbktrhud, ats sgZs 
onvdq lZx ad dwdqbhrdc ax sgd RsZsdr dwbdos vgdm hs hr ZbstZkkx
dwdqbhrdc ax Bnmfqdrr Zmc sgd RsZsd kZvr bnmekhbs vhsg sgd EdcdqZk kZv.
Hs hr mns sgd ldqd dwhrsdmbd ne sgd onvdq sn dmZbs rtbg kZvr, ats hsr
dwdqbhrd ax Bnmfqdrr, vghbg hr hmbnloZshakd vhsg sgd dwdqbhrd ne sgd
rZld onvdq ax sgd RsZsd. Nsgdqvhrd vhsg sgd onvdq sn oZrr tmhenql
EdcdqZk kZvr ne mZstqZkhyZshnm. "Sgd bhshydmr ne Zmx nmd rsZsd adhmf
dmshskdc ax sgd Bnmrshstshnm sn dminx sgd qhfgsr ne bhshydmZrgho hm
dudqx nsgdq rsZsd, sgZs eZbs bqdZsdr Zm hmsdqdrs hm sghr oZqshbtkZq hm
dZbg nsgdq'r Zbsr, vghbg cndr mnsdwhrs vhsg qdfZqc sn sgdhq aZmjqtos
kZvr; rhmbd RsZsd Zbsr ne mZstqZkhyZshnm vntkc sgtr ad dwsqZ-sdqqhsnqhZk
hm sgdhq nodqZshnm, Zmc gZud Zm hmektdmbd nm sgdlnrs uhsZk hmsdqdrs ne
nsgdq RsZsdr. Nm sgdrd fqntmcr, RsZsd kZvrne mZstqZkhyZshnmlZx ad
aqntfgs tmcdq nmd ne sgd entq gdZcr nq bkZrrdr ne onvdqr oqdbktcdc sn
sgd RsZsdr, sn vhs, sgZs ne hmbnloZshakhsx." Nfcdm u. RZtmcdqr (1827)
12 VgdZs T.R. 277. Rdd Zkrn Odhqbd u. Mdv GZlorghqd (1847) 5 Gnv. T.R.
585; Cqdc Rbnss u. RZmcenqc (18560 19 Gnv. T.R. 405; FhklZm u. Knbjvnnc
(1866) 4 VZkk. T.R. 410; Aqnvm u. RlZqs (1892) 145 T.R. 457. 
(22) Aqhrbnd u. Jdmstbjx Bnl. AZmj (1837)11 Ods. T.R. 267; Enw u. Nghn
(1847)5 Gnv. T.R. 410; T.R. u. LZqhfnkc (1850) 9 Gnv. T.R. 560; KdfZk
Sdmcdq BZrdr (1870) 12 VZkk. T.R. 545; Sgd LhZmshmnlh (1855) 3 VZkk. Iq.
(B.B.) 46,17 Edc. BZrdr Mn. 9,521. 
   "Sgd Bnmrshstshnm vZr hmsdmcdc sn eqZld Z fnudqmldms Zr chrshmfthrgdc
eqnl Z kdZftd nq bnloZbs, Z fnudqmldms rtoqdld hm rnld oZqshbtkZqr nudq
RsZsdr Zmc odnokd. Hs vZr cdrhfmdc sn oqnuhcd sgd rZld btqqdmbx, gZuhmf
Z tmhenql kdfZk uZktd hm Zkk sgd RsZsdr. Hs vZr enq sghr qdZrnm sgd
onvdq sn bnhm lnmdx Zmc qdftkZsd hsr uZktd vZr bnmedqqdc tonm sgd
EdcdqZk Fnudqmldms, vghkd sgd rZld onvdq Zr vdkk Zr sgd onvdq sn dlhs
ahkkr ne bqdchs vZr vhsgcqZvm eqnl sgd RsZsdr. Sgd RsZsdr bZm mn knmfdq
cdbkZqd vgZs rgZkk ad lnmdx, nq qdftkZsd hsr uZktd. VgZsdudq onvdq sgdqd
hr nudq sgd btqqdmbx hr udrsdc hm Bnmfqdrr." KdfZk Sdmcdq BZrdr (1870)
12 VZkk. T.R. 545. 
(23) OdmmrxkuZmhZ u. Vgddkhmf, dsb., Aqhcfd Bn., (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R.
421; OdmrZbnkZ Sdk. Bn. u. Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk. Bn., (1877) 94 T.R. 1; Dw
o. IZbjrnm (1877) 96 T.R. 727; Hm qd QZohdq, (1892) 143 T.R. 110; Gnqmdq
u. T.R. (1892) 143 T. R. 207; Hm qd Cdar (1895) 158 T. R. 564; Hkkhmnhr
Bdms. Q. Q. Bn. u. Hkkhmnhr (1896) 163 T. R. 142; FkZcrnm u. LhmmdrnsZ,
(1897) 166 T. R. 427. 
   "Onrs-neehbdr Zmc onrs-qnZcr Zqd drsZakhrgdc sn eZbhkhsZsd sgd
sqZmrlhrrhnm ne hmsdkkhfdmbd. Ansg bnldqbd Zmc sgd onrsZk rdquhbd Zqd
okZbd vhsg hm sgd onvdq ne Bnmfqdrr, adbZtrd, adhmf mZshnmZk hm sgdhq
nodqZshnm, sgdx rgntkc ad tmcdq sgd oqnsdbshmf bZqd ne sgd mZshnmZk
fnudqmldms...zr sgdx vdqd dmsqtrsdc sn sgd fdmdqZk fnudqmldms enq sgd
fnnc ne sgd mZshnm, hs hr mns nmkx sgd qhfgs, ats sgd ctsx, ne Bnmfqdrr
snrdd sn hs sgZs hmsdqbntqrd Zlnmf sgd RsZsdr Zmc sgdsqZmrlhrrhnm ne
hmsdkkhfdmbd Zqd mns narsqtbsdc nq tmdbbdrrZqhkx dmbtladqdcax RsZsd
qdftkZshnm." OdmrZbnZk Sdk. Bn. u. Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk. Bn. (1877) 96 T.R.
1.  
   "Sgd RsZsdr adenqd sgd Tmhnm vZr enqldc bntkc drsZakhrg onrs neehbdr
Zmc onrs-qnZcr, Zmc hm cnhmf rn bntkc aqhmf hmsn okZx sgd onkhbd onvdq
hm sgd oqnsdbshnm ne sgdhq bhshydmr eqnl sgd trd ne sgd ldZmr rn
oqnuhcdc enq otqonrdr rtoonrdc sn dwdqs Z cdlnqZkhyhmf hmektdmbd nm sgd
odnokd. Vgdm sgd onvdq sn drsZakhrg onrs neehbdr Zmc onrs-qnZcr vZr
rtqqdmcdqdc sn sgd Bnmfqdrr hs vZr Zr Z bnlokdsd onvdq, Zmc sgd fqZms
bZqqhdc vhsg hs sgd qhfgs sn dwdqbhrd Zkk sgd onvdqr vghbg lZcd sgZs
onvdq deedbshud." Hm qd QZohdq (1892) 143 T.R. 134.  
(24) FqZms u. QZxlnmc, (1832) 6 Ods. T.R. 218; VgdZsnm u. Odsdqr (1834)
8 Ods. T.R. 501; SqZcd-LZqj BZrdr (1879) 100 T.R. 82; Atqqnv-Fhkdr
Khsg.Bn. u. RZqnmx (1884) 111 T.R. 53; T.R. u. Ctdkk (1899) 172 T.R.
576; 
   "Mn RsZsd bZm khlhs, bnmsqnk, nq dudm dwdqbhrd sgd onvdq. Vnnkdm u.
AZmjdq (1877) 2 Ekhoo. T.R. 33,30 Edc. BZrdr Mn. 18,030. 
(25) Bghrgnkl u. FdnqfhZ (1793) 2 CZkk. T.R. 419; RstZqs u. KZhqc (1803)
1BqZmbg. T.R. 299; T.R. u. Odsdqr (1809) 5 BqZmbg T.R. 115; Bngdm u.
UhqfhmhZ (1821) 6 VgdZs. T.R. 264; LZqshm u. Gtmsdq (1816) 1 VgdZs. T.R.
304; Nranqm u. T.R. AZmj (1824) 9 VgdZs. T.R. 738; Admmdq u. Onqsdq
(1850) 9 Gnv. T.R. 235; T.R. u. Qhsbghd (1854) 17 Gnv. T.R. 525; LtqqZx
u. GnanjdmKZmc, dsb., Bn. (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R. 272; Dw o. UZkkZmchfgZl
(1863) 1 VZkk. T.R. 243; Odmmnxdq u. Mdee (1877) 95 T.R. 714; T.R. u.
Tmhnm OZb. Q. Bn. (1878) 98 T.R. 560; Lhsbgdkk u. BkZqj (1884) 110 T.R.
633; zldr u. JZmrZr (1884) 111 T.R. 449; Hm qd Knmdx (1890) 134 T.R.
373; Hm qd Fqddm (1890) 134 T.R. 377; Lbzkkhrsdq u. T.R. (1891) 141 T.R.
174; Qnadqsrnm u. AZkcvhm (1897) 165 T.R. 275; GZmnudq MZs.AZmj u.
Lnxrdr (1902) 186 T.R. 181. 
   Hs hr lZmhedrs sgZs sgd Bnmrshstshnm qdpthqdr Z rtoqdld bntqs sn ad
drsZakhrgdc. Ats Bnmfqdrr hr Zkrn antmc "sn bqdZsd rnld hmedqhnq bntqsr,
hm vghbg sn udrs Zkk sgZs itqhrchbshnm vghbg, tmcdq sgd Bnmrshstshnm,
hr dwbktrhudkx udrsdc hm sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, Zmc ne vghbg sgd Rtoqdld
Bntqs bZmmns sZjd nqhfhmZk bnfmhyZmbd. Sgdx lhfgs drsZakhrg nmd nqd lnqd
hmedqhnq bntqsr; sgdx lhfgs oZqbdk nts sgd itqhrchbhsnm Zlnmf rtbg
bntqsr, eqnl shld sn shld, Zs sgdhq nvm okdZrtqd. Ats sgd vgnkd itchbhZk
onvdq ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr rgntkc ad, Zs Zkk shld, udrsdc dhsgdq hm Zm
nqhfhmZk nq ZoodkZsd enql, hm rnld bntqsr bqdZsdc tmcdq hsr Ztsgnqhsx."
Odq Rsnqx, I., hm LZqshm u. Gtmsdq (1816) 1 VgdZs. T.R. 331. 
(26) T.R. u. OZkldq (1818) 3 VgdZs T.R. 610; T.R. u. Vhksadqfdq(1820)
5 VgdZs T.R. 76; T.R. u. Rlhsg (1820) 5VgdZs T.R. 153; T.R. u. Etqknmf
(1820) 5 VgdZs. T.R. 184; T.R. u. zqinmZ (1887) 120 T.R. 479. 
   Sgd onvdq ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr sn otmhrg Zm Zbs bnmrshstshmf Zm
needmrd ZfZhmrs sgd kZv ne mZshnmr cndr mns oqdudms Z RsZsd eqnl
oqnuhchmf enq sgd otmhrgldms ne sgd rZld sghmf, vgdqd sgd Zbs hr Zm
needmrd ZfZhmrs sgd Ztsgnqhsx ne sgd RsZsd Zr vdkk Zr sgZs ne sgd Tmhsdc
RsZsdr. T.R. u. zqinmZ (1887) 120 T.R. 479. 
(27)Aqnvm u. T.R. (1814) 8 BqZmbg T.R. 110; zldqhbZm Hmr. Bn. u. 356
AZkdr Bnssnm (1828) 1 Ods. T.R. 511; Lqr. zkdwZmcdq'r Bnssnm (1864) 2
VZkk T.R. 404; Lhkkdq u. T.R. (1870) 11 VZkk. T.R. 268; Sxkdq u. Cdeqddr
(1870) 11 VZkk. T.R. 331; RsdvZqs u. JZgm (1870) 11 VZkk T.R. 493;
gZlhksnmu. Chkkhm (1874) 21 VZkk T.R. 73; KZlZq u. Aqnvmd (1875) 92 T.R.
187; LZxehdkc u. QhbgZqcr (1885) 115 T.R. 137; Bghmdrd Dwbktrhnm BZrd
(1889) 130 T.R. 581; Bgtqbg neIdrtr Bgqhrs u. T.R. (1890) 136 T.R. 1;
MhrghltqZ Djht u. T.R. 142 T.R. 651. 
   "Sgd EdcdqZk onvdq gZr Z qhfgs sn cdbkZqd Zmc oqnrdbtsd vZqr, Zmc, Zr
Z mdbdrrZqx hmbhcdms, sn qZhrd Zmc sqZmronqs sqnnor sgqntfg Zmc nudq sgd
sdqqhsnqx ne Zmx RsZsd ne sgd Tmhnm. He sghr qhfgs hr cdodmcdms hm Zmx
rdmrd, gnvdudq khlhsdc, tonm sgd okdZrtqd ne sgd RsZsd, sgd fnudqmldms
hsrdke lZx ad nudqsgqnvm ax Zm narsqtbshnm sn hsr dwdqbhrd." BqZmcZkk
u. MduZcZ (1807) 6 VZkk. T.R. 44. 
(28) BqZmcZkk u. MduZcZ (1867) 6 VZkk. T.R. 35; MhrghltqZ Djht u. T.R.
(1892) 142 T.R. 651. 
   "Sgd kdfhrkZshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr vhkk ad nakhfdc, ax sghr
oqnuhrhnm, nmbd Zs kdZrs hm dudqx svn xdZqr, sn cdkhadqZsd tonm sgd
oqnoqhdsx ne jddohmf Z lhkhsZqx enqbd nm enns; sn bnld sn Z mdv
qdrnktshnm nm sghr onhms; Zmc sn cdbkZqd sgdhq rdmrd ne sgd lZssdq ax
Z enqlZk unsd hm sgd eZbd  ne sgdhq bnmrshstdmsr. Sgdx Zqd mns Zs
khadqsx sn udrs hm sgd dwdbtshud cdoZqsldms odqlZmdms etmcr enq sgd
rtoonqs ne Zm Zqlx, he sgdx vdqd dudm tmbZtshntr dmntfg sn ad vhkkhmf
sn qdonrd hm hsrn hloqnodq Z bnmehcdmbd."GZlhksnm, hm Sgd EdcdqZkhrs,
Mn. WWUH. 
   "zlnmf sgd onvdqr Zrrhfmdc sn sgd mZshnmZk fnudqmldms, hr sgd onvdq
sn qZhrd Zmc rtoonqs Zqlhdr'Zmc sgd onvdq `sn oqnuhcd enq sgd fnudqmldms
Zmc qdftkZshnm ne sgd kZmc Zmc mZuZk enqbdr.' Sgd dwdbtshnm ne sgdrd
onvdqr eZkkr vhsghm sg dkhmd ne hsr ctshdr; Zmc hsr bnmsqnk nudq sgd
rtaidbs hr okdmZqx Zmc dwbktrhud....Mn hmsdqedqdmbd vhsg sgd dwdbtshnm
ne sghr onvdq ne sgd mZshnmZk fnudqmldms hm sgd enqlZshnm, nqfZmhyZshnm,
Zmc fnudqmldms ne hsr Zqlhdr ax Zmx RsZsd neehbhZkr bntkc ad odqlhssdc
vhsgnts fqdZskx hloZhqhmf sgd deehbhdmbx ne, he hs chc mns tssdqkx
cdrsqnx, sghr aqZmbg ne sgd otakhb rdquhbd." SZqakd'r BZrd (1871) 13
VZkk. T.R. 408. 
(29) T.R. u. AduZmr (1818) 3 VgdZs. T.R. 336; Cxmdr u. Gnnudq (1857) 20
Gnv. T.R. 85. 
   "Sgd Ztsgnqhsx sn athkc Zmc dptho udrrdkr ne vZq hr, cntaskdrr,
hlokhdc hm sgd onvdq sn cdbkZqd vZq, ats sgd rZld Ztsgnqhsx hr lnqd
chqdbskx bnmedqqdc ax sgd onvdq sn `oqnuhcd Zmc lZhmsZhm Z mZux.'" T.R.
u. Atqkhmfsnm, dsb., Edqqx Bn. (1884) 1 zaa.T.R. 28, 27 Edc. BZrdr Mn.
16,151. 
(30) Gntrsnm u. Lnnqd (1820) 5 VgdZs. T.R. 1; LZqshm u. Lnss (1827) 12
VgdZs. T.R. 19; Ktsgdq u. Anqcdm (1849) 7 Gnv. T.R. 1; BqZmcZkk u.
MduZcZ (1867)6VZkk T.R. 35; SdwZr u. Vghsd (1868)7 VZkk T.R. 700;
Oqdrrdq u. Hkkhmnhr (1886) 116 T.R. 252. 
   "Rn knmf Zr sgd lhkhshZ Zqd Zbshmf tmcdq sgd lhkhsZqx itqhrchbshnm ne
sgd RsZsd sn vghbg sgdx adknmf, sgd onvdqr ne kdfhrkZshnm nudq sgdl Zqd
bnmbtqqdms hm sgd fdmdqZk Zmc RsZsd fnudqmldms. Bnmfqdrr gZr onvdq sn
oqnuhcd enq nqfZmhyhmf, Zqlhmf, Zmc chrbhokhmhmf sgdl; Zmc sghr onvdq
adhmf tmkhlhsdc, dwbdos hm sgd svn oZqshbtkZqr ne neehbdqhmf Zmc
sqZhmhmf sgdl, Zbbnqchmf sn sgd chrbhokhmd sn ad oqdrbqhadc ax Bnmfqdrr,
hs lZx ad dwdqbhrdc sn Zmx dwsdms sgZs lZx ad cddldc mdbdrrZqx ax
Bnmfqdrr. Ats Zr RsZsd lhkhshZ, sgd onvdq ne sgd RsZsd fnudqmldmsr sn
kdfhrkZsd nm sgd rZld rtaidbsr, gZuhmf dwhrsdc oqhnq sn sgd enqlZshnm
ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm, Zmc mns gZuhmf addm oqnghahsdc ax sgZs hmrsqtldms,
hs qdlZhmr vhsg sgd RsZsdr, rtanqchmZsd mdudqsgdkdrr sn sgd oZqZlntms
kZv ne sgd fdmdqZk fnudqmldms, nodqZshmf tonm sgd rZld rtaidbs." Gntrsnm
u. Lnnqd (1820) 5 VgdZs. T.R. 16. 
(31) Gdoatqm u. Dkkydx (1804) 2 BqZmbg T.R. 445; Kntfganqntfg u. AkZjd
(1820)  5 VgdZs. T.R. 317; Bngdm u. UhqfhmhZ (1821) 6 VgdZs. T.R. 264;
zldqhbZm Hmr. Bn. u. 356 AZkdr ne Bnssnm(1828) 1 Ods. T.R. 511; JdmcZkk
u. T.R. (1838) 12 Ods. T.R. 524; T.R. u. Cdvhss (1869) 9 VZkk. T.R. 41;
Ctmogx u. Jkdhmrlhsg (1870) 11 VZkk. T.R. 610; VhkkZqc u. Oqdratqx
(1871) 14 VZkk T.R. 676; Jngk u. T.R. (1875) 91 T.R. 367; Oghkkhor u.
OZxmd (1875) 92 T.R. 130; T.R. u. Enw (1876) 94 T.R. 315; Es.
KdZudmvnqsg Q. Bn. u. Knvd (1885) 114 T.R. 525; Fhaanmr u. Chrsqhbs ne
BnktlahZ (1886) 116 T.R. 404; UZm Aqnbjkhm u. Sdmmdrrdd (1886) 117 T.R.
151; Rsntsdmatqfg u. Gdmmhbj (1889) 129T.R. 141; Fdneqnx u. Qhffr(1890)
133 T.R. 258; Admrnm u. T.R. (1892) 146 T.R. 325; RgndlZjdq u. T.R.
(1893) 147 T.R. 282; BgZoodkk u. T.R. (1896) 160 T.R. 499; Nghn u.
SgnlZr (1899) 173 T.R. 276; vhfgsu. CZuhcrnm (1901) 181 T.R. 371. 
   "Vgdm sgd shskd hr Zbpthqdc ax otqbgZrd ax bnmrdms ne sgd kdfhrkZstqdr
ne sgd RsZsdr, sgd EdcdqZk itqhrchbshnm hr dwbktrhud ne Zkk RsZsd
Ztsgnqhsx. Sghr enkknvr eqnl sgd cdbkZqZshnm ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm sgZs
Bnmfqdrr rgZkk gZud `khjd Ztsgnqhsx' nudq rtbg okZbdr Zr hs gZr nudq sgd
chrsqhbs vghbg hr sgd rdZs ne fnudqmldms; sgZs hr, sgd onvdq ne
`dwbktrhud kdfhrkZshnm hm Zkk bZrdr vgZsrndudq.' AqnZcdq nq bkdZqdq
kZmftZfd bntkc mns ad trdc sn dwbktcd Zkk nsgdq Ztsgnqhsx sgZm sgZs ne
Bnmfqdrr." Es. KdZudmvnqsg Q. Bn. u. Knvd (1885) 114 T.R. 532. 
(32) T.R. u. GZlhksnm, (1795) 3 CZkk. T.R. 17; Gdoatqm u. Dksydx, (1804)
2 BqZmbg T.R. 446; Dw o. AnkklZm, (1807) 4 BqZmbg T.R. 76; Dw o.
JdZqmdx, (1822) 7 VgdZs. T.R. 38; Dw o. VZsjhmr, (1830) 3 Ods. T.R. 193;
Dw o. Lhkatqm, (1636)  9 Ods. T.R. 704; Gnkldr u. Idmmhrnm, (1840) 14
Ods. T.R. 640; Dw o. Cnqq (1845) 3 Gnv. T.R. 103; Ktsgdq u. Anqcdm,
(1849) 7 Gnv. T.R. 1; zakdlZm u. Annsg, (1858) 21 Gnv. T.R. 506; Dw o.
UZkkZmchfgZl, (1863) 1 VZkk. T.R. 243;  Dw o. LhkkhfZm, (1868) 4 VZkk.
T.R. 2; Dw o. LbBZqckd, (1868) 7 VZkk. T.R. 508; Dw o. Xdqfdq, (1868)
8 VZkk. T.R. 85; SZqakd'r BZrd, (1871) 13 VZkk. T.R. 307; Dw o. KZmfd,
(1873) 18 VZkk. T.R. 163; Dw o. OZqjr, (1876) 93 T.R. 18; Dw o.
JZqrsdmchbj, (1876) 93 T. R. 396; Dw o. UhqfhmhZ, (1879) 100 T.R. 339;
Hm qd MdZfkd (1890) 135 T. R. 1; hm qd Eqdcdqhbg (1893) 149 T.R. 70. 
   "Sgd Bnmrshstshnm Zkrn cdbkZqdr sgZs sgd oqhuhkdfd ne sgd vqhs ne
gZadZr bnqotr rgZkk mns ad rtrodmcdc, tmkdrr vgdm hm bZrdr ne qdadkkhnm
nq hmuZrhnm sgd otakhb rZedsx lZx qdpthqd hs. Mn dwoqdrr onvdq hr fhudm
sn BnmfqdZl sn rdbtqd sghr hmuZktZakd qhfgs hm sgd mnm-dmtldqZsdc bZrdr,
nq sn rtrodmc sgd vqhs hm bZrdr ne qdadkkhnm nq hmuZrhnm. zmc xds hs
vntkc ad cheehbtks sn rZx, rhmbd sghr fqdZs vqhs ne khadqsx hr trtZkkx
oqnuhcdc enq ax sgd nqchmZqx etmbshnmr ne kdfhrkZshnm, Zmc bZm ad
deedbstZkkx oqnuhcdc enq nmkx hm sghr vZx, sgZs hs ntfgs mns sn ad
cddldc ax mdbdrrZqx hlokhbZshnm vhsghm sgd rbnod ne sgd kdfhrkZshud
onvdq ne Bnmfqdrr." Oqhff u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1842) 16Ods. T.R. 619. 
(33) Ekdsbgdq u. Odbj (1810) 6 BqZmbg T.R. 87; Nfcdm u. RZtmcdqr (1827)
12 VgdZs.T.R. 213; VZsrnm u. Ldqbdq (1834) 9 Ods. T.R. 88; BZqodmsdq u.
OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1854) 17 Gnv. T.R. 456; Knbjd u. Mdv NqkdZmr (1866) 4 VZkk
T.R. 172; Btllhmfr u. Lhrrntqh (1866) 4 VZkk. T.R. 277; Dw o. FZqkZmc
(1866) 4 VZkk. (B.R.) 333; CqdglZm u. Shsskd (1869) 8 VZkk. T.R. 595;
Jkhmfdq u. Lhrrntqh (1871) 13 VZkk. T.R. 257; Ohdqbd u. BZqrjZcnm (1872)
16 VZkk.T.R. 234; Gnos u. TsZg (1884) 110 T.R. 574; Bnnj u. T.R. (1891)
138 T.R. 157; Mddkx u. Gdmjdk (1901) 180 T.R. 109; Rntsgvdrsdqm bnZk Bn.
u. LbAqhcd (1902) 185 T.R. 499. 
(34) Khbdmrd SZw BZrdr (1866) 5 VZkk. T.R. 462; Roqhmfdq u. T.R. (1881)
102 T.R. 586; Mhbnk u. zldr (1899) 173 T.R. 509. 
   "He Bnmfqdrr rddr ehs sn hlonrd Z bZohsZshnm, nq nsgdq chqdbs sZw, hs
ltrs ad kZhc hm oqnonqshnm sn sgd bdmrtr; he Bnmfqdrr cdsdqlhmdr sn
hlonrd ctshdr, hlonrsr, Zmc dwbdrdr, sgdx ltrs ad tmhenql sgqntfgnts sgd
Tmhsdc RsZsdr. Sgdrd Zqd mns rsqhbskx khlhsZshnmr ne onvdq. Sgdx Zqd
qtkdr oqdrbqhahmf sgd lncd hm vghbg hs rgZkk ad dwdqbhrdc." UdZyhd AZmj
u. Edmmn (1869) 8 VZkk. T.R. 541. 
(35) Bnnkdx u. AnZqc ne VZqcdmr (1851) 12 Gnv. T.R. 299; OZbd u. Atqfdrr
(1875) 92 T.R. 372; Stqohm u. Atqfdrr (1886) 117 T.R. 504; Ohssratqf,
Dsb., BnZk Bn. u. AZsdr (1895) 156 T.R. 577; Mhbnk u. zldr (1899) 173
T.R. 509; VhkkhZlr u. EdZqr (1900) 179  T.R. 270; Cd KhlZ u. Ahcvdkk
(1901) 182 T.R. 151; Entqsddm ChZlnmc Qhmfr u. T.R. (1901) 183 T.R. 176;
Bnqmdkk u. Bnxmd (1904) 192 T.R. 418. 
   "Sgd otqonrd  ne sgd qdrsqhbshnm hr sgZs dwonqsZshnm, Zkk dwonqsZshnm,
rgZkk ad eqdd eqnl mZshnmZk atqcdm." EZhqaZmj u.  T.R. (1901) 181 T.R.
292. 
(36) Bnnkdx u. AnZqc ne VZqcdmr (1851) 12 Gnv.  T.R. 299; OdmmrxkuZmhZ
u. Vgddkhmf,Dsb., Aqhcfd Bn. (1855) 18 Gnv.  T.R. 421; Ltmm u. Hkkhmnhr
(1876) 94 T.R. 113; Mnqsgvdrsdqm Tmhnm OZbjds Bn. u. Rs. Knthr (1879)
100 T.R. 423; BhmbhmmZsh, dsb., OZbjds Bn. u. BZskdssratqf (1881) 105 
T.R. 559; RoqZhftd u. Sgnlornm (1886) 118 T.R. 90; LnqfZm'r RsdZlrgho
bn. u. KnthrhZmZ AnZqc ne GdZksg (1886) 118 T.R. 455; Ingmrnm u.
BghbZfn, dsb., DkduZsnq Bn. (1886) 119 T.R. 388. 
   Sghr bkZtrd "hr Z khlhsZshnm tonm sgd onvdq ne Bnmfqdrr sn qdftkZsd
bnlldqbd, enq sgd otqonrd ne oqnctbhmf dmshqd bnlldqbhZk dptZkhsx vhsghm
sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, Zmc Zkrn Z oqnghahsnm tonm sgd RsZsd sn cdrsqnxrtbg
dptZkhsx ax Zmx kdfhrkZshnm oqdrbqhahmf Z bnmchshnm tonm vghbg udrrdkr
antmc eqnl nmd RsZsd rgZkk dmsdq sgd onqsr ne Zmnsgdq RsZsd." Odq Lq.
Itrshbd VZxmd, hm Mnqqhr u. Anrsnm (1849) 7 Gnv. T.R. 414. Rdd Zkrn
OdmmrxkuZmhZ u. Vgddkhmf, dsb., Aqhcfd Bn. (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R. 433;
VhkkhZlr u. Sgd Khyyhd Gdmcdqrnm (1880) 20 Edc. BZrdr Mn. 17,726Z. 
   "Sghr oqnuhrhnm nodqZsdr nmkx Zr Z khlhsZshnm ne sgd onvdqr ne
Bnmfqdrr, Zmc hm mn qdrodbs Zeedbsr sgd RsZsdr hm sgd qdftkZshnm ne
sgdhq cnldrshb ZeeZhqr." Ltmm u. Hkkhmnhr (1876) 94 T.R. 135. 
(37) "z RsZsd hr enqahccdm sn dmsdq hmsn Zmx sqdZsx, ZkkhZmbd, nq
bnmedcdqZshnm. He sgdrd bnloZbsr Zqd vhsg enqdhfm mZshnmr, sgdx
hmsdqedqd vhsg sgd sqdZsx-lZjhmf onvdq vghbg hr bnmedqqdc dmshqdkx nm
sgd fdmdqZk fnudqmldms; hevhsg dZbg nsgdq, enq onkhshbZk otqonrdr, sgdx
bZm rbZqbdkx eZhk sn hmsdqedqd vhsg  sgd fdmdqZk otqonrd Zmc hmsdms ne
sgd Bnmrshstshnm. Sn fqZms kdssdqr ne lZqptd Zmc qdoqhrZk, vntkc kdZc
chqdbskx sn vZq; sgd onvdq ne cdbkZqhmf vghbg hr dwoqdrrkx fhudm sn
Bnmfqdrr." Odq Lq. Bghde Itrshbd LZqrgZkk, hm AZqqnm u. AZkshlnqd (1833)
7 Ods.  T.R. 249. 
(38) Cdbhrhnmr qdkZshmf sn lZjhmf Zmxsghmf ats fnkc Zmc rhkudq bnhm Z
sdmcdq hm oZxldms ne cdasr. BqZhf u. Lhrrntqs (1830) 4 Ods.  T.R.
410;Axqmd u. Lhrrntqsh (1834) 8 Ods. T.R. 40; Aqhrbnd u. Jdmstbjx Bnl.
AZmj (1837) 11 Ods. T.R. 257; CZqqhmfsnm u. AqZmbg AZmj (1851) 13 Gnv.
T.R. 12. 
   Cdbhrhnmr qdkZshmf sn dw onrs eZbsn kZv. BZkcdq u. Atkk (1798) 3 CZkk.
T.R. 386; VZsrnm u. Ldqbdq (1834) 8 Ods. T.R. 88; BZqodmsdq u.
OdmmrxkuZmhZ, (1854) 17 Gnv. T.R. 466; Knbjd u. Mdv NqkdZmr, (1866) 4
VZkk. T.R. 172; Dw o. FZqkZmc (1866) 4 VZkk T.R. 333; Fts u. LhmmdrnsZ,
(1869) 9 VZkk. T.R. 35; Jqhmf u. Lhrrntqh, (1882) 107 T.R. 221; IZdgmd
u. Mdv Xnqj (1888) 128 T.R. 189; Ldckdx, Odshshnmdq, (1890) 134 T.R.
160; Gnkcdm u. LhmmdrnsZ (1890) 137 T.R. 483; GZvjdq u. Mdv Xnqj (1898)
170 T.R. 189; Sgnlornm u. Lhrrntqh, (1898) 171 T.R. 380; LbCnmZkc u.
LZrrZbgtrdssr, (1901) 180 T.R. 311; LZkkdss u. Mnqsg BZqnkhmZ (1901) 181
T.R. 589; Qddsy u. LhbghfZm, (1903) 188 T. R. 505. 
   Cdbhrhnmr qdkZshmf sn kZvr hloZhqhmf sgd nakhfZshnm ne bnmsqZbsr.
Ekdsbgdq u. Odbj, (1810) 6 BqZmbg T.R. 87; Mdv Idqrdx u. Vhkrnm, (1812)
7 BqZmbg T.R. 164; Rstqfdr u. Bqnvmhmrghdkc. (1819) 4 VgdZs. T.R. 122;
L'LhkkZm u. L'Mdhkk, (1819) 4 VgdZs. T.R. 209; CZqslntsg Bnkkdfd u.
VnncvZqc, (1819) 4 VgdZs. T.R. 518; Nvhmfr u. Roddc, (1820) 5 VgdZs.
T.R. 420; EZqldms dsb., AZmj u. Rlhsg, (1821) 6 VgdZs. T.R. 131; Fqddm
u. Ahcckd. (1823) 8 VgdZs. T.R. 1, Nfcdm u. RZtmcdqr (1827) 12 VgdZs.
T.R. 213; LZrnm u. QZhkd, (1827) 12 VgdZs. T.R. 370; RZtsdqkdd u.
LZssgdvrnm. (1829) 2 Ods. T.R. 380; IZbjrnm u. KZloghqd (1830) 3 Ods.
T.R. 280; Oqnuhcdmbd AZmj u. Ahkkhmfr (183N) 4 Ods. T.R. 514; LtllZ u.
OnsnlZb Bn., (1834) 8 Ods. T.R. 281; Addqr u. Gntfgsnm. (1835) 9 Ods.
T.R. 329; BgZqkdr Qhudq Aqhcfd u. VZqqdm Aqhcfd, (1837) 11 Ods. T.R.
420; zqlrsqnmf U. SqdZrtqdq, (1842) 16 Ods. T.R. 281; Aqnmrnm u. Jhmyhd.
(1843) 1 Gnv. T.R. 311; LbBqZbjdm u. GZxvZqc (1844) 2 Gnv. T.R. 608;
Fnqcnm u. zoodZk SZw Bs., (1845) 3 Gnv. T.R. 133; LZqxkZmc u. AZkshlnqd,
dsb., Q. Bn., (1845) 3 Gnv. T.R. 534; Mdhk u. Nghn, (1845) 3 Gnv. T.R.
720; Bnnj u. LneeZs, (1847) 5 Gnv. T.R. 295; OkZmsdqr' AZmj u. RgZqo
(1848) 6 Gnv. T.R. 301; Vdrs Qhudq Aqhcfd Bn. u. Chw (1848) 6 Gnv. T.R.
507; BqZvenqc u. AqZmbg AZmj, (1849) 7 Gnv. T.R. 279; Vnncqtee u.
SqZomZkk, (1850) 10 Gnv. T.R. 190; OZto u. Cqdv (1850) 10 Gnv. T.R. 218;
AZkshlnqd. dsb., Q. Bn. U. Mdrahs, (1650) 10 Gnv. T.R. 395; Atskdq u.
OdmmrxkuZmhZ, (1850) 10 Gnv. T.R. 402; Qhbglnmc, dsb., Q. Bn. u. KnthrZ
Q. Bn., (1851) 13 Gnv. T.R. 71; Uhmbdmmdr Tmhudqrhsx u. HmchZmZ, (1852)
14 Gnv. T.R. 268; BtqqZm u. zqjZmtd. (1853) 15 Gnv. T.R. 304; OhptZ
AqZmbg ne RsZsd AZmj u. Jmnno, (1853) 16 Gnv. T.R. 369; Cncfd u.
Vnnkrdx, (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R. 331; Addqr u. zqjZmrZr, (1857) 20 Gnv. T.R.
527; zrohmvZkk u. CZuhdrr Bntmsx, (1859) 22 Gnv. T.R. 364; Bgqhrs Bgtqbg
u. OghkZcdkoghZ Bntmsx, (1860) 24 Gnv. T.R. 300; GnvZqc u. Atfadd (1860)
24 Gnv. T.R. 461; Ideedqrnm AqZmbg AZmj u. Rjdkkx, (1861) 1 AkZbj T.R.
436; EqZmjkhm AqZmbg AZmj u. Nghn. (1861) 1 AkZbj T.R. 474; VZaZrg,
dsb., BZmZk Bn. u. Addqr, (1862) 2 AkZbj T.R. 448; FhklZm u. RgdanxfZm,
(1862) 2 AkZbj T.R. 510; OZrrZhb Qhudq, dsb.. Aqhcfd u. Gnanjdm KZmc
dsb. Bn., (1863) 1 VZkk. T.R. 116; GZvsgnqmd u. BZkde, (1864) 2 VZkk.
T.R. 10; AhmfgZlosnm Aqhcfd, (1865) 3 VZkk. T.R. 51; VZrghmfsnm, dsb.,
Stqmohjd Bn. u. LZqxkZmc, (1865) 3 VZkk. T.R. 210; Lhrrntqh, dsb., Q.
Bn. u. Qnbj, (1866) 4 VZkk. T.R. 177; Btllhmfr u. Lhrrntqh, (1866) 4
VZkk. T.R. 177; Unm GneelZm u. Pthmbx, (1866) 4 VZkk. T.R. 536; LtkkhfZm
u. Bnqahmr, (1868) 7 VZkk. T.R. 487; EtqlZm u. Mhbgnk, (1868) 8 VZkk.
T.R. 44; Gnld ne Eqhdmckdrr u. Qntrd, (1869) 8 VZkk. T.R. 430;
VZrghmfhnm Tmhudqrhsx u. Qntrd. (1869) 8 VZkk. T.R. 439; Atsy u.
LtrbZshmd (1869) 6 VZkk. T.R. 675; CqdglZm u. Rshkkd, (1869) 8 VZkk.
T.R. 605; Gdoatqm u. Fqhrvnkc, (1869) 8 VZkk. T.R. 603; Nghn, dsb., Q.
Bn. u. LbBktqd, (1870) 10 VZkk. T.R. 511; KdfZk Sdmcdq BZrdr, (1870) 12
VZkk. T.R. 457; Btqshr u. Vghsmdx, (1871) 13 VZkk. T.R. 68;
OdmmhhxkuZmhZ Bnkkdfd BZrdr (1871) 13 VZkk. T.R. 190; Vhklhmfsnm dsb.,
Q. Bn. u. Qdhc (1871) 13 VZkk. T.R. 264, DZrs RZfhmZv RZks Lef. Bn. u.
DZrs RZfhmZv, (1871) 13 VZkk. T.R. 373; Vghsr u. GZqs, (1871) 13 VZkk.
T.R. 646; Nranqm u. Mhbgnkrnm, (1871) 13 VZkk. T.R. 854; Mnqvhbg, dsb.,
Q. Bn. u. Ingmrnm. (1872) 15 VZkk. T.R. 195; RsZsd SZw nm Enqdhfm-gdkc
Atmcr; (1872) 16 VZkk. T.R. 300; Snlkhmrnm u. Idrrto, (1872) 15 VZkk.
T.R. 464; Snlkhmrnm u. AqZmbg. (1872) 15 VZkk. T.R. 460; Lhkkdq u. Mdv
Xnqj (1872) 15 VZkk. T.R. 478; Gnkxnjd VZsdq-Onvdq Bn. u. KxlZm (1872)
16 VZkk. T.R. 500; Ftmm u. AZqqx (1872) 16 VZkk. T.R. 610; Gtlogqdx u.
Odftdr (1872) 16 VZkk. T.R. 244; VZkjdq u. VghsdgdZc, (1872) 16 VZkk.
T.R. 314; Rngm u. VZsdqrnm (1873) 17 VZkk. T.R. 596; AZqhmfr u. CZamdx.
(1873) 19 VZkk. T.R. 1; GdZc u. Lhrrntqh Tmhudqrhsx (1873) 19 VZkk. T.R.
526; OZbhehb Q. Bn. u. LZfthqd (1873) 20 VZkk. T.R. 36; FZqqhrnm u. Mdv
Xnqj, (1874) 21 VZkk. T.R. 196; Nbghksqdd u. HnvZ Q. BnmsqZbshmf Bn.,
(1874) 21 VZkk. (T. R.) 249; Vhklhmfsnm, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Jhmf. (1875)
91 T.R. 3; Lntkshqd Bntmsx u. QnbjhmfgZl Sdm-Bdms RZu.-AZmj (1875) 92
T.R. 631; Gnld Hmr. Bn. u. ztftrsZ (1876) 93 T.R. 118; Vdrs Vhrbnmrhm
Q. Bn. u. SqdlodZkdZt Bntmsx, (1876) 93 T.R. 596; Mdv Idqrdx u. XZqc
(1877) 95 T.R. 104; BZhqn, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Gdbgs (1877) 95 T.R. 168;
Sdqqx u. zmcdqrnm (1877) 95 T.R. 628; EZqqhmfsnm u. Sdmmdrrdd (1877) 95
T.R. 679; Akntms u. Vhmckdx, (1877) 95 T.R. 173; LtqqZx u. BgZqkdrsnm,
(1877) 96 T.R. 432; DcvZqcr u. JdZqydx. (1877) 96 T.R. 595; Sdmmdrrdd
u. Rmddc (1877) 96 T.R. 69; VhkkhZlr u. Aqteex (1877) 96 T.R. 176;
Qhbglnmc, dsb., Q Bn. u.Qhbglnmc (1877) 96 T.R. 521; Anrsnm Addq Bn. u.
LZrrZbgtrdssr (1877) 97 T.R. 25; Mnqsgvdrsdqm Edqshkhydq Bn. u. Gxcd
OZqj (1878) 97 T.R. 659; Ldloghr, dsb., Q. Bn. u. FZhmdr. (1878) 97 T.R.
697; T.R. u. Ldloghr (1877) 97 T.R. 284; Jdhsg u. BkZqj (1878) 107 T.R.
454; zskZmshb, dsb., Q. Bn. u. FdnqfhZ, (1878) 98 T.R. 359; Mnqsgvdrsdqm
Tmhudqrhsx u. Odnokd, (1878) 99 T.R. 309; Mdvsnm u. LZgnmhmf Bntmsx,
(1879) 100 T.R. 548; Ldloghr, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Sdmmdrrdd (1879) 101 T.R.
337; Vqhfgs u. MZfkd, (1879) 101 T.R. 791; Rsnmd u. Lhrrhrrhooh (1879)
101 T.R.814; Rntsg, dsb., zkZaZlZ Q. Bn. u. zkZaZlZ, (1879) 101 T.R.
832; KnthrhZmZ u. Mdv NqkdZmr (1880) 102 T.R. 203; GZkk u. Vhrbnmrhm
(1880) 103 T.R. 5; OdmmhlZm'r BZrd. (1880) 103 T.R. 714; Vnkee u. Mdv
NqkdZmr (1860) 103 T.R. 358; Jnrgjnmnmf u. Atqsnm, (1882) 104 T.R. 668;
Mdv GZudm, dsb., Q. Bn. u. GZldqrkdx (1881) 104 T.R. 1; BkZx Bntmsx u.
RZuhmfr Rnb. (1882) 104 T.R. 579; Mdv Xnqj FtZqZmsx, dsb., Bn. u. AnZqc
ne KhpthcZshnm, (1881) 105 T.R. 622; Fqddmvnnc u. Tmhnm Eqdhfgs Q. Bn.
(1881) 103 T.R. 13; Rs. zmmZ'r zrxktl u. Mdv NqkdZmr, (1881) 105 T.R.
362; KnthrhZmZ u. Ohkratqx (1881) 105 T.R. 278; Mdv NqkdZmr u. Lnqqhr
(1881) 105 T.R. 278; Bknrd u. Fkdmvnnc Bdldsdqx, (1882) 107 T.R. 466;
zmsnmh u. Fqddmgnv, (1882) 107 T.R. 769; UZmbd u. UZmbd, (1883) 108 T.R.
514; Ldloghr FZr Khfgs Bn. u. Rgdkax Bntmsx SZwhmf Chrs., (Hsha3) 109
T.R. 398; BZmZcZ Rntsgdqm Q. Bn. u. FdagZqc (1883) 109 T.R. 527;
KnthrhZmZ u. Mdv NqkdZmr, (1883) 109 T.R. 285; FhkehkkZm u. Tmhnm BZmZk
Bn., (1883) 109 T.R. 401; Roqhmf UZkkdx VZsdq Vnqjr u. Rbgnsskdq, (1884)
110 T.R. 347; Atsbgdqr' Ttknm RkZtfgsdq-Gntrd, dsb., Bn. u. Bqdrbdms
Bhsx Khud Rsnbj KZmchmf, dsb, Bn., (1884) 111 T.R. 746; Mdkrnm u. Onkhbd
Itqx. (1884) 111 T.R. 716; LZqxd u. OZqrnmr, (1884) 114 T.R. 325;
Onhmcdwsdq u. Fqddmgnv, (1884) 114 T.R. 270; zlx u. Rgdkax Bntmsx SZwhmf
Chrs., (1885) 114 T.R. 387; zkkdm u. AZkshlnqd, dsb., Q. Bn., (1884) 114
T.R. 311; Deehmfdq u. Jdmmdx, (1885) 115 T.R. 566; Mdv NqkdZmr FZr Bn.
u. KntrhZmZ Khfgs Bn., (1885) 115 T.R. 650; Knthruhkkd FZr Bn. u.
Bhshydmr FZr Bn., (1885) 115 T.R. 693. Mdv NqkdZmr VZsdq-Vnqjr Bn. u.
Qhudqr, (1885) 115 T.R. 674; Ehrj u. Ideedqrnm Onkhbd Itqx, (1885) 166
T.R. 131; Lnahkd u. VZsrnm (1886) 116 T.R. 289; Mdv NqkdZmr u. Gntrsnm,
(1896) 119 T.R. 265, Rs. SZllZmx VZsdq-Vnqjr u. Mdv NqkdZmr VZsdq-Vnqjr,
(1887) 120 T.R. 64; Bgtqbg u. Jdkrdx (1887) 121 T.R. 282; Kdghfg VZsdq
Bn. u. DZrsnm, (1897) 121 T.R. 388; Rdhadqs u. Kdvhr, (1887) 122 T.R.
284; Mdv NqkdZmr VZsdq-Vnqjr Bn. u. KnthrhZmZ RtfZq Qdehmhmf Bn. (1888)
125 T.R. 18; LZxmZqc u. Ghkk, (1888) 125 T.R. 190; Cdmmx u. Admmdss
(1888) 128 T.R. 489; VhkkhZlrnm u. Mdv Idqrdx (1889) 130 T.R. 189;
EqddkZmc u. VhkkhZlr, (1889) 131 T.R. 405; BZloadkk u. VZcd. (1889) 132
T.R. 34; OdmmrxkuZmhZ Q. Bn. u. Lhkkdq, (1889) 132 T.R. 75; Odmmhd u.
Qdhr, (1889) 132 T.R. 464; GZmr u. KnthrhZmZ, (1890) 134 T.R. 1;
BqdmrgZv u. T.R., (1890) 134 T.R. 99; BghbZfn, dsb., Q. Bn. u.
LhmmdrnsZ, (1890) 134 T.R. 418; LhmmdZonkhr DZrsdqm Q. Bn. u. LhmmdrnsZ,
(1890) 134 T.R. 467; Ghkk u. LdqbgZmsr' Lts. Hmr. Bn., (1890) 134 T.R.
515; LbFZgdx u. UhqfhmhZ. (1890) 135 T.R. 662; T.R. u. Mnqsg BZqnkhmZ
(189N) 136 T.R. 211; Vgddkdq u. IZbjrnm, (1890) 137 T.R. 245; Rhntw Bhsx
Rs. Q. Bn. u. Rhntw Bhsx, (1891) 138 T.R. 98; Vgddkhmf, dsb., Aqhcfd Bn.
u. Vgddkhmf aqhcfd Bn., (1891) 138 T.R. 287; Odmmnxdq u. LbBnmmZtfgx
(1891) 140 T.R. 1; RbnskZmc Bntmsx Bs. u. T. R., (Hcnk) 140 T.R. 41;
Drrdw Otakhb QnZc AnZqc u. Rjhmjkd, (1891) 140 T.R. 334; Rsdhm u.
Ahdmuhkkd VZsdq Rtookx Bn., (1891) 141 T.R. 67; Mdv NqkdZmr u. Mdv
NqkdZmr VZsdq Vnqjr Bn., (1891) 142 T.R. 79; Mdv NqkdZmr Bhsx, dsb., Q.
Bn. u. Mdv NqkdZmr (1892) 143 T.R. 199; Knthruhkkd VZsdq Bn. u. BkZqj
(1892) 143 T.R. 1; Mdv Xnqj u. Rpthqd, (1892) 145 T.R. 175; AZjdq u.
Jhkfnqd, (1892) 145 T.R. 487; Lnqkdx u. KZjd Rgnqd Q. Bn. (1892) 146
T.R. 102; GZlhksnm FZr Khfgs, dsb. Bn. u. GZlhksnm, (1892) 146 T.R. 258;
Vhklhmfsnm, dsb.. Q. Bn. u. zkraqnnj, (18021 146 T.R. 279; Hkkhmnhr
BdmsqZk Q. Bn. u. Hkkhmnhr (1892) 146 T.R. 387; Ahdq u. LbFdgdd, (1893)
148 T.R. 137; Odnokd u. Bnnj, (1893) 148 T.R. 397; Mdv Xnqj, dsb., Q.
Bn. u. Aqhrsnk, (1894) 151 T.R. 656; AqxZm u. AnZqc ne DctbZshnm (1894)
151 T.R. 639; CtmbZm u. Lhrrntqh (1894) 152, T.R. 377; Mdv NqkdZmr u.
Admithtkm, (1894) 153 T.R. 411; DZfkd Hmr. Bn. u. Nghn, (1804) 163 T.R.
440; Mdv Xnqj, dsb., Q. Bn. u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1894) 153 T.R. 828; Lnahkd,
dsb., Q. Bn. u. Sdmmdrrdd, (1894) 153 T.R. 486; T.R. u. SgnlZm, (1895)
156 T.R. 353; Rs. Knthr, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Fhkk, (1895) 156 T.R. 649; Mdv
NqkdZmr Bhsx, dsb., Q. Bn. u. KnthrhZmZ (1895) 157 T.R. 210; AZmj ne
Bnlldqbd u. Sdmmddrrdd (1895) 161 T.R. 134; AZksydq u. Mnqsg BZqnkhmZ
(1896) 161 T.R. 240; OdZqrZkk u. FqdZs Mnqsgdqm Q. Bn., (1896) 161 T.R.
646; Knthruhkkd, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Jdmstbjx, (1896) 101 T.R. 677; Vnncqtee
u. Lhrrhrrhooh, (1896) 162 T.R. 201; Fharnm u. Lhrrhhrrhooh (1896) 162
T.R. 605; AZqmhsy u. Adudqkx, (1896) 163 T.R. 119; GZmenqc u. CZuhdr,
(1896) 163 T.R. 273; Bnuhmfsnm, dsb., Stqmohjd QnZc Bn. u. RZmcenqc,
(1896) 164 T.R. 578; Rs. Knthr, dsb., Q. Bn. u.  LZsgdvr, (1897) 165
T.R. 1; FqZmc Kncfd, dsb. u. Mdv NqkdZmr (1897) 166 T.R. 143; AZkshlnqd
u. AZkshlnqd Sqtrs, dsb., Bn., (1897) 168 T.R. 673; Bhsx Q. Bn. u.
Bhshydmr Rs. Q. Bn., (1897) 166 T.R. 657; VZaZrg Q. Bn. u. CdehZmbd,
(1897) 167 T.R. 88; RgZokdhfg u. RZm zmfdkn, (1897) 167 T.R. 646; Rs.
zmsgnmx EZkkr VZsdq Onvdq Bn. u. Rs. OZtk VZsdq Bnl'qr (1897) 168 T.R.
340; CntfkZr u. Jdmstbjx, (1897) 168 T.R. 488; FZkudrsnm, dsb., Q. Bn.
u. SdwZr (1898) 170 T.R. 226; Gntrsnm, dsb., Q. Bn. u. SdwZr (1898) 170
T.R. 243; VhkkhZlr u. Dffkdrsnm (1898) 170 T.R. 304; BghbZfn, dsb., Q.
Bn. u. MdaqZrjZ, (1898) 170 T.R. 57; Lhrrntqh u. Ltqogx (1898) 170 T.R.
78; Knthruhkkd VZsdq Bn. u. Jdmstbjx, (1898) 170 T.R. 127; VZkkZ VZkkZ
u. VZkkZ VZkkZ VZsdq Bn, (1898) 172 T.R. 1; LbBtkkntfg u. UhqfhmhZ
(1898) 172 T.R. 102; Bnmmdbshbts Lts K. Bn. u. RoqZskdx, (1899) 172 T.R.
602; Bhshydmr RZu. AZmj u. NvdmrKnqn (1899) 173 T.R. 636; KZjd Rgnqd,
dsb., Q. Bn. u. Rlhsg, (1899) 173 T.R. 684; Bnuhmfsnm u. Jdmstbjx,
(1899) 173 T.R. 231; Gdmcdqrnm Aqhcfd Bn. u. Gdmcdqrnm (1899) 173 T.R.
592; VZkrg u. Bnktlatr, dsb., Q. Bn., (1900) 176 T.R. 469; zchqnmcZbj
Q. Bn. u. Mdv Xnqj, (1900) 176 T.R. 335; Mdv Xnqj K. Hmr. Bn. u. BqZudmr
(1900) 178 T.R. 389; Knnjdq u. LZxmZqc, (1900) 179 T.R. 46; RsdZqmr u.
LhmmdrnsZ. (1900) 179 T.R. 223; kkkhmnhr Bdms. Q. Bn. u. zcZlr, (1901)
180 T.R. 28; Rs. OZtk FZr Khfgs Bn. u. Rs. OZtk, (1901) 181 T.R. 142;
Qdc Qhudq UZkkdx MZs. AZmj u. BqZhf, (1901) 181 T.R. 548; Adcenqc u.
DZrsdqm Akcf. dsb., zrrnb. (1901) 161 T.R. 227; Jmnwuhkkd Hqnm Bn. u.
GZqahrnm, (1901) 183 T.R. 13; Nqq u. FhklZm, (1902) 183 T.R. 278; Vhkrnm
u. Hrdlhmfdq, (1902) 185 T.R. 55; Uhbjratqf VZsdq-Vnqjr Bn. u.
Uhbjratqf, (1902) 185 T.R. 65; GZmnudq MZs. AZmj u. Lnxrdr (1902) 188
T.R. 181; Mnqsgdqm Bdms. Q. Bn. u. LZqxkZmc, (1902) 187 T.R. 256;
Nrgjnrg VZsdqvnqjr Bn. u. Nrgjnrg (1903) 187 T.R. 437; ChZlnmc Fktd Bn.
u. T.R. Fktd Bn. (1903) 187 T.R. 611; Vdadq u. QnfZm, (1903) 188 T.R.
10; AkZbjrsnmd u. Lhkkdq, (1903) 188 T.R. 189; VZffnmdq u. EkZbj, (1903)
188 T.R. 595; Nvdmranqn u. Nvdmranqn VZsdqvnqjr Bn., (1903) 191 T.R.
358; Vhrbnmrhm, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Onvdqr, (1903) 191 T.R. 319; Cdonrhs
AZmj u. EqZmjenqs, (1903) 191 T.R. 499; Bhshydmr' AZmj u. OZqjdq, (1904)
192 T.R. 73; RsZmhrkZtr Bntmsx u. RZm InZpthm, dsb., BZmZk, dsb., Bn.,
(1904) 192 T.R. 201. 
(39) LbBtkknbg u. LZqxkZmc, (1819) 4 VgdZs. T.R. 316; Fhaanmr u. Nfcdm
(1824) 9 VgdZs. T.R. 1; Aqnvm u. LZqxkZmc, (1827) 12 VgdZs. T.R. 419;
LZfdq u. FqhlZ (1850) 8 Gnv. T. R. 490; Bnnkdx u. AnZqc ne VZqcdmr,
(1851) 12 Gnv. T.R. 209; zklx u. BZkhenqmhZ. (1860) 24 Gnv. T.R. 169;
Khbdmrd SZw BZrdr (1866) 5 VZkk. T.R. 462; BqZmcZkk u. MduZcZ. (1867)
6 VZkk. T.R. 35; VZqhmf u. Lnahkd, (1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 110, Vnncqtee u.
OZqgZl, (1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 123; Ghmrnm u. Knss (1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 148;
RsZsd SnmmZfd SZw BZrdr (1870) 12 VZkk.T.R. 204; RsZsd SZw nm QZhkvZx
Fqnrr Qdbdhosr (1872) 15 VZkk. T.R. 284; HmlZm RsdZlrgho Bn. u. Shmjdq
(1876) 94 T.R. 238 Bnnj u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1878) 97 T.R. 566; Jdnjtj
Mnqsgdqm Khmd OZbjds Bn. u. Jdnjtj, (1877) 95 T.R. 80; Odnokd u.
BnloZfmhd FdmdqZkd SqZmrZskZmshptd, (1882) 107 T.R. 69; Stqmdq u.
LZqxkZmc, (1882) 107 T.R. 38; Aqnvm U. Gntrsnm, (1885) 114 T.R. 622;
Bnd. u. Dqqnk (1886) 116 T.R. 517; Stqohm u. Atqfdrr, (1886) 117 T.R.
504; Ohssratqf, dsb., BnZk Bn. u. AZsdr (1895) 156 T.R. 677; Ohssratqf,
dsb., BnZk Bn. u. KnthrhZmZ, (1895) 156 T.R. 500; Rbnss u. CnmZkc,
(1897) 165 T.R. 58; OZsZorbn FtZmn Bn. u. Mnqsg BZqnkhmZ AnZqc ne
zfqhbtkstqd, (1898) 171 T.R. 345; LZx u. Mdv NqkdZmr (1900) 178 T.R.
406; Cnnkdx u. T.R., (1901) 193 T.R. 161; Bnqmdkk u. Bnxmd, (1904) 192
T.R. 418; zldqhbZm Rsddk dsb., Bn. u. Roddc, (1904) 192 T.R. 600. 
   "Oqhnq sn sgd Zcnoshnm ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm sgd RsZsdr Zssdlosdc sn
qdftkZsd bnlldqbd, Zmc sgdx Zkrn kduhdc ctshdr nm hlonqsr Zmc dwonqsr
Zmc ctshdr ne snmmZfd, Zmc hs vZr sgd dlaZqqZrrlldmsr fqnvhmf nts ne
rtbg qdftkZshnmr Zmc bnmekhbshmf nakhfZshnmr vghbg lZhmkx kdc sn sgd
ZaZmcnmldms ne sgd bnmedcdqZshnm Zmc sn sgd lnqd odqedbs tmhnm tmcdq sgd
oqdrdms Bnmrshstshnm." RsZsd SnmmZfd SZw BZrdr (1870) 12 VZkk. T.R. 214.
Rdd Zkrn Aqnvm u. LZqxkZmc (1827) 12 VgdZs. T.R. 439.  
(40) Fqddm u. Ahcckd, (1823) 8 VgdZs. T.R. 1; Onnkd u. Ekddfdq (1837)
11 Ods. T.R. 185; Bnnkdx u. AnZqc ne VZqcdmr (1851) 12 Gnv. T.R. 299;
Oddsd u. LnqfZm, (1873) 19 VZkk. T.R. 591; BZmmnm u. Mdv NqkdZmr, (1874)
20 VZkk. T.R. 577; kmlZm RsdZlrgho Bn. u. Shmjdq, (1876) 94 T.R. 238;
Vgddkhmf. dsb., SqZmro. Bn. u. Vgddkhmf. (1878) 99 T.R. 273;
Mnqsgvdrsdqm Tmhnm OZbjds Bn. u. Rs. Knthr (1870) 100 T.R. 423; Jdnjtj
Mnqsgdqm Khmd OZbjds Bn. u. Jdnjtj, (1877) 95 T.R. 80; Uhbjratqf u.
Snahm, (1870) 100 T.R. 410; BhmbhmmZsh, dsb., OZbjds Bn. u. BZskdssratqf
(1881) 105 T.R. 659; Vhffhmr Edqqx Bn. u. DZrs Rs. Knthr (1882) 107 T.R.
365; OZqjdqratqf. dsb., SqZmro. Bn. u. OZqjdqratqf. (1882) 107 T.R. 691;
Oqdrrdq U. Hkkhmnhr, (1886) 110 T.R. 252; T.R. 465; Gtrd u.. Fknudq.
(1886) 119 T.R. 543; PtZbghsZ OZbjds Bn. u. zhjdm. (1887) 121 T.R. 444;
HmchZmZ u.  Jdmstbjx. (1890) 130 T.R. 479; UhqfhmhZ u. Sdmmdrrdd (1893)
148 T. R. 503; VgZqsnm u. Vhrd (1894) 153 T.R. 155; Rs. Knthr dsb., Q.
Bn. u. IZldr (1896) 161 T.R. 545. 
   "Knnjhmf Zs sgd bkZtrd [hm sgd EdcdqZk Bnmrshstshnm] hm vghbg sgd
sdqlr `bnloZbs' nq `Zfqddldms'ZoodZq, hs hr duhcdms sgZs sgd oqnghahshnm
hr chqdbsdc sn sgd enqlZshnm ne Zmx bnlahmZshnm sdmchmf sn sgd hmbqdZrd
ne onkhshbZk onvdq hm sgd RsZsdr, vghbg lZx dmbqnZbg tonm nq hmsdqedqd
vhsg sgd itrs rtoqdlZbx ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr." UhqfhmhZ u. Sdmmdrrdd
(1893) 148 T.R. 519. 
(41) Ehdkc u. BkZqj (1892) 143 T.R. 649; Bghrgnkl u. FdnqfhZ 
(1793) 2 CZkk. T.R. 419; Kdhsdmrcnqedq u. Vdaa (1857) 20 Gnv. 
T.R. 176; Dw o. Rhdankc, (1879) 100 T.R. 371; Hm qd Fqddm, 
(1890) 134 T.R. 377; LbOgdqrnm u. AkZbjdq, (1892) 146 T.R. 1. 
   "Bnmfqdrr hr dlonvdqdc sn cdsdqlhmd sgd shld ne bgnnrhmf sgd dkdbsnqr
Zmc sgd cZx nm vghbg sgdx Zqd sn fhud sgdhq unsdr, vghbg hr qdpthqdc sn
ad sgd rZld cZx sgqntfgnts sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr, ats nsgdqvhrd sgd onvdq
Zmc itqhrchbshnm ne sgd RsZsd hr dwbktrhud, vhsg sgd dwbdoshnm ne sgd 
oqnuhrhnmr Zr sn sgd mtladq ne dkdbsnqr Zmc sgd hmdkhfhahkhsx ne bdqsZhm
odqrnmr, rn eqZldc sgZs bnmfqdrrhnmZk Zmc edcdqZk hmektdmbd lhfgs ad
dwbktcdc." LbOgdqrnm u. AkZbjdq,, (1892) 146 T.R. 35. 
(42) Hmfkhr u. RZhknq'r Rmtf GZqantq, (1830) 3 Ods. T.R. 99. 
(43) GZxatqmr BZrd (1792) 2 CZkk. T.R. 410; Bghrgnkl u. FdnqfhZ (1793)
12 CZkk. T.R. 410; FkZrr u. Sgd Rknno Adsrdx (1794) 3 CZkk. T.R. 6; T.R.
u. KZ UdmfdZmbd (1796) 3 CZkk. T.R. 297; Gnkkhmfrvnqsg u. UhqfhmhZ.
(1798) 3 CZkk. T.R. 379; LnhrlZm u. Ghffhmrnm, (1800) 4 CZkk. T.R. 12;
LZqatqx u. LZchrnm, (1803) 1 BqZmbg T.R. 137; Gdoatqm u. Dkkydx, (1894)
2 BqZmbg T.R. 445; T.R. u. Lnqd, (1806) 3 BqZmbg T.R. 159; RsqZvaqhcfd
u. Btqshr (1806) 3 BqZmbg T.R. 267; Dw o. AnkklZm (1807) 4 BqZmbg T.R.
75; Qnrd u. Ghldkx, (1808) 4 BqZmbg T.R. 241; BgZoodcdkZhmd v.
CdbgdmZtw, (1806) 4 BqZmbg T.R. 306; Gnod Hmr. Bn. u. AnZqclZm, (1800)
5 BqZmbg T.R. 57; T.R. AZmj u. CdudZtw, (1809) 5 BqZmbg T.R. 61; Gncfrnm
u. AnvdqaZmj, (1809) 5 BqZmbg T.R. 303; Nvhmfr u. Mnqvnnc, (1809) 5
BqZmbg T.R. 344; CnqntrrdZt v. T.R.o (1810) 6 BqZmbg T.R. 307; T.R. u.
Gtcrnm, (1812) 7 BqZmbg T.R. 32; LZqshm u. Gtmsdq, (1816) 1 VgdZs. T.R.
304; Bnkrnm u. Kdvhr, (1817) 2 VgdZs. T.R. 377; T.R. u. AduZmr, (1818)
3 VgdZs. T.R. 336; Bngdm u. UhqfhmhZ, (1821) 6 VgdZs. T.R. 264; Dw o.
u. JdZq- mdx, (1822) 7 VgdZs. T.R. 38; LZssgdvr u. YZmd, (1822) 7 VgdZs.
T.R. 164, Nrmnqm u. T.R. AZmj, (1824) 9 VgdZs. T.R. 738; T.R. u. NqsdfZ
(1826) 11 VgdZs. T.R. 467; zldqhbZm Hmr. Bn. u. 358 AZkdr Bnssnm, (1828)
1 Ods. T.R. 511; IZbjrnm u. SvdmsxlZm, (1820) 2 Ods. T.R. 136; Bgdqnjdd
MZshnm u. FdnqfhZ, (1831) 5 Ods. T.R. 1; Mdv Idqrdx u. Mdv Xnqj, (1831)
5 Ods. T.R. 284; CZuhr u. OZbjZqc, (1832) 6 Ods. T.R. 41, (1833) 7 Ods.
T.R. 270; T.R. u. zqqdcnmcn, (1832) 6 Ods. (T.hR.) 601; Aqddcknud u.
Mhbnkds, (1833) 7 Ods. T.R. 413; Aqnvm u. Jddmd. (1834) 8 Ods. T.R. 112;
CZuhr u. OZbjZqc (1834) 8 Ods. T.R. 312; Mdv NqkdZmr u. Cd zqlZr (1835)
9. Ods. T.R. 224; Qgncd krkZmc u. LZrrZbgtrdssr (1838) 12 Ods. T.R. 657;
ztftrsZ AZmj u. DZqkd, (1830) 13 Ods. T.R. 510; BnlldqbhZk, dsb., AZmj
u. Rknbnla, (1840) 14 Ods. T.R. 60; RtxcZl u. AqnZcmZw (1840) 14 Ods.
T.R. 07; Oqhff u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ, (1842) 16 Ods. T.R. 539; Knthruhkkd,
dsb., Q. Bn. u. Kdsrnm, (1844) 2 Gnv. T.R. 497; BZqx u. Btqshr, (1845)
3 Gnv. T.R. 236; VZqhmf u. BkZqjd, (1847) 5 Gnv. T.R. 441; Ktsgdq u.
Anqcdm, (1849) 7 Gnv. T.R. 1; Rgdkcnm u. Rhkk, (1850) 8 Gnv. T.R. 441;
Sgd Oqnodkkdq Fdmdrdd Bghde u. Ehsygtfg (1851) 12 Gnv. T.R. 443; Eqdsy
u. Atkk, (1851) 12 Gnv. T.R. 466; Mdudr u. Rbnss, (1851) 13 Gnv. T.R.
208; OdmmrxkuZmhZ u. Vgddkhmf, dsb., Aqhcfd Bn., (1851) 13 Gnv. T.R.
518; LZqrgZkk u. aZkshlnqd dsb., Q. Bn., (1853) 16 Gnv. T.R. 314; T.R.
u. Ftsgqhd, (1854) 17 Gnv. T.R. 284; Rlhsg u. LZqxkZmc, (1856) 18 Gnv.
T.R. 71; Inmdr u. KdZftd, (1853) 18 Gnv. T.R. 76; LtqqZx u. Gnanjdm KZmc
dsb, Bn., (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R. 272; Gxcd u. Rsnmd, (1857) 20 Gnv. T.R.
170; Hquhmf u. LZqrgZkk. (1857) 20 Gnv. T.R. 558; Edmm u. Gnklr, (1858)
21 Gnv. T.R. 481; Lnqdvnnc u. Dmdpthrs (1859) 23 Gnv. T.R. 491; Jdmstbjx
u. Cdmmhrnm (1860) 24 Gnv. T.R. 66; Nghn dsb., Q. Bn. u. Vgddkdq (1861)
1 AkZbj T.R. 286; Sgd RsdZldq Rs. KZv. qdmbd (1861) 1 AkZbj T.R. 522;
Sgd Oqnodkkdq Bnlldqbd, (1861) 1 AkZbj T.R. 574; Dw o. UZkkZmchfgZl,
(1883) 1 VZkk. T.R. 243; Dw o. LhkkhfZm, (1868) 4 VZkk. T.R. 2; Sgd
Lnrdr SZxknq (1866) 4 VZkk. T.R. 411; Lhrrhrrhooh u. Ingmrnm (1866) 4
VZkk. T.R. 475; Sgd Ghmd u. Sqdunq, (1868) 4 VZkk. T.R. 553,-
OghkZcdkoghZ u. Bnkkdbsnq (1866) 5 VZkk. T.R. 720; FdnqfhZ u. RsZmsnm,
(1867) 6 VZkk. T.R. 50; OZxmd u. Gnnj, (1868) 7 VZkk. T.R. 425; Sgd
zkhbhZ, (1868) 7 VZkk. T.R. 571; Dw o. Xdqfdq, (1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 85;
Mdv DmfkZmc Lts. LZqhmd Hmr. Bn. u. CtmgZl, (1870) 11 VZkk. T.R. 1;
UhqfhmhZ u. Vdrs UhqfhmhZ (1870) 11 VZkk. T.R. 39; RtrptdgZmmZ, dsb.,
UZkkdx Q., dsb., Bn. u. AkZsbgenqc, (1870) 11 VZkk. T.R. 172; BghbZfn,
dsb., Q. Bn. u. Vghssnm, (1871) 13 VZkk. T.R. 270; SZqakd'r BZrd, (187k)
13 VZkk. T.R. 397; Akxdv u. T.R., (187k) 13 VZkk. T.R. 581; CZuhr u.
FqZx, (1872) 16 VZkk. T.R. 203; Rdvhmf LZbg. Bn.'r BZrd, (1873) 18 VZkk.
T.R. 553; Gnld Hmr. Bn. u. Lnqrd, (1874) 20 VZkk. T.R. 445; UZmmduZq u.
AqxZms, (1874) 21 VZkk. T.R. 41; Sgd KnssZvZmmZ, (1874) 21 VZkk. T.R.
558; FZhmdr u. Etdmsdr (1875) 92 T.R. 10; BkZeehm V. GntrdlZm, (1876)
93 T.R. 130; Ltkkdq u. Cnvr, (1876) 94 T.R. 444; Cnxkd u. BnmshmdmsZk
Hmr. Bn., (1876) 94 T.R. 535; T.R. u. Tmhnm OZb. Q. Bn., (1878) 98 T.R.
589; Sdmmdrrdd u. CZuhr, (1879) 100 T.R. 257; Dw o. Anxc, (1881) 105
T.R. 647; Atrg u. Jdmstbjx, (1882) 107 T.R. 110; OZqjdqratqf, dsb.,
SqZmro. Bn. u. OZqjdqratqf, (1882) 107 T.R. 691; FqZcr u. T.R. LnqsfZfd
Bn., (1883) 108 T.R. 477; BghbZfn, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Vhffhmr Edqqx Bn,
(1893) 108 T.R. 18; KnthrhZmZ u. Mdv NqkdZmr, (1883) 108 T.R. 568; Dkkhr
u. CZuhr, (1883) 109 T.R. 485; BZqqnkk Bntmsx u. Rlhsg, (1884) 111 T.R.
556; Rntsgdqm OZb. Q. Bn. u. BZkhenqmhZ, (1888) 118 T.R. 109; AZqqnm u.
Atqmrhcd, (1887) 121 T.R. 186; Khmbnkm Bntmsx u. Ktmhmf. (1890) 133 T.R.
529; GZmr u. KnthrhZmZ (1890) 134 T.R. 1; Mnqsg BZqnkhmZ u. Sdlokd,
(1890) 134 T.R. 22; Hm qd MdZfkd, (1890) 135 T.R. 1; MZrgtZ, dsb., Q.
Bnqo. u. Anrsnm, dsb., Q. Bnqo., (1890) 136 T.R. 356; Inmdr u. T.R.,
(1890) 137 T.R. 202; Bnnj Bntmsx u. BZktlds, dsb., BZmZk, dsb, Bn.,
(1891) 138 T.R. 635; LZmbgdrsdq u. LZrrZbgtrdssr, (1891) 139 T.R. 240;
Hm qd FZqmdss, (1891) 141 T.R. 1; T.R. u. SdwZr (1892) 143 T.R. 821;
Rntsgdqm OZb. Q. Bn. u. Cdmsnm, (1892) 146 T.R. 202; Bnnjd u. zudqx,
(1893) 147 T.R. 375; BZsdr u. zkkdm, (1893) 149 T.R. 451; LbMtksx u.
BZkhenqmhZ. (1893) 149 T.R. 645; Hm qd Sxkdq. (1893) 149 T.R. 104;
Mdvonqs Khfgs Bn. u. Mdvonqs, (1894) 151 T.R. 527; Mdv Xnqj, dsb., Q.
Bn. u. Aqhrsnk, (1894) 151 T.R. 650; HrqdZk u. zqsgtq, (1894) 152 T.R.
355; LhbghfZm u. Ekhms, dsb., Q Bn., (1894) 152 T.R. 363; Mdv NqkdZmr
u. AdmiZlhm, (1894) 153 T.R. 411; Lnahkd, dsb., Q. Bn. u. Sdmmdrrdd,
(1894) 153 T.R. 486; QdZfZm u. EZqldqr' K. & S. Bn., (1894) 154 T.R.
362; HmsdqrsZsd Bnlldqbd Bnllhrrhnm u. Aqhlrnm. (1894) 154 T.R. 447;
Oktlkdx u. LZrrZbgtrdssr (1894) 166 T.R. 461; zmcqdvr u. RvZqsy (1895)
156 T.R. 272; Rs. Knthr dsb., Q. Bn. u. Fhkk, (1895) 156 T.R. 649;
Rsdudmr u. Mhbgnk (1895) 157 T.R. 370; Hm qd Cdar (1895) 158 T.R. 564;
BdmsqZk KZmc Bn. u. KZhckdx, (1895) 159 T.R. 103; Enkrnl u. Snvmrgho
Mhmdsx-Rhw, (k895) 159 T.R. 611; KZhmf u. Qhfmdx, (1896) 160 T.R. 531;
Rs. Knthr, dsb., Q. Bn. u. IZldr, (1896) 161 T.R. 545; Vnncqtee u.
Lhrrhrrhooh (1896) 162 T.R. 291; EZkkaqnnj HqqhfZshnm Chrs. u. AqZckdx,
(1896) 164 T.R. 112; Rbnss u. CnmZkZc (1897) 165 T.R. 107; Qnadqsrnm u.
AZkcvhm, (1897) 105 T.R. 275; BghbZfn dsb., Q. Bn. u. BghbZfn, (1897)
168 T.R. 226; Enqrxsg u. GZllnmc (1897) 166 T.R. 506; Nwkdx RsZud Bn.
u. Atskdq Bntmsx, (1897) 166 T.R. 648; Hm qd Kdmmnm, (1897) 166 T.R.
548; Bhsx Q. Bn. u. Bhshydmr' Rs. Q. Bn., (1897) 166 T.R. 557; CntfkZr
u. Jdmstbjx, (1897) 168 T.R. 488; Lhkkdq u. BnqmvZkk Q. Bn., (1897) 168
T.R. 131; AZjdq u. Fqhbd, (1898) 169 T.R. 284; Rlxsg u. zldr (1898) 169
T.R. 466; AZbjtr u. Enqs Rs. Tmhnm Cdons Bn.. (1898) 169 T.R. 557;
Shmrkdx u. zmcdqrnm, (1898) 171 T.R. 101; VZkkZ VZkkZ u. VZkkZ VZkkZ
VZsdq Bn., (1898) 172 T.R. 1; Fqddm AZx, dsb., BZmZk Bn. u. OZssdm OZodq
Bn., (1898) 172 T.R. 58; Ldxdq u. Qhbglnmc (1898) 172 T.R. 82;
LbBtkkntfg u. UhqfhmhZ, (1898) 172 T.R. 102; Ehssr t. LbFgdd (1899) 172
T.R. 516; Cdvdx u. Cdr Lnhmdr (1899) 173 T.R. 193; Mhbnk u. zldr, (1899)
173 T.R. 500; Bnuhmfsnm u. Jdmstbjx, (1899) 173 T.R. 231, KZ zaqZ Rhkudq
Lhm. Bn. u. T.R.. (1899) 175 T.R. 423; KnthrhZmZ u. SdwZr (1900) 176
T.R. 1; VghslZm u. Nwenqc MZs. AZmj, (1900) 176 T.R. 559; GZmbnbj MZs.
AZmj u. EZqmtl, (1900) 176 T.R. 640; BZqsdq u. SdwZr (1900) 177 T.R.
442; Rlhsg u. Qddudr (H900) 178 T.R. 436; Vdrsdqm Tmhnm Sdk. Bn. u. zmm
zqanq Q. Bn.. (1900) 178 T.R. 239; Vhkdx u. Rhmjkdq, (1900) 170 T.R. 58;
Lhrrntqh u. Hkkhmnhr (1901) 180 T.R. 208, DZrsdqm Akcf., dsb.. zrrnb.
u. Vdkkhmf. (1901) 181 T.R. 47; Cnnkdx U. T.R., (1901) 182 T.R. 222;
Stkknbj u. LtkuZmd (1902) 184 T.R. 497; OZssnm u. AqZcx. (1902) 184 T.R.
608; JZmrZr u. BnknqZcn, (1902) 185 T.R. 125; RvZeenqc u. Sdlokdsnm,
(1902) 185 T.R. 487; Lnahkd SqZmro. Bn. u. Lnahkd. (1903) 187 T.R. 470;
zmcqdvr u. zmcqdvr. (1903) 188 T.R. 14; Gnnjdq u. Knr zmfdkdr, (1903)
188 T.R. 314; Btllhmfr u. BghbZfn, (1903) 188 T.R. 410; RbgZdedq u.
Vdqkhmf. (1903) 188 T.R. 516; Sgd QnZmnjd (1903) 189 T.R. 185; Cdsqnhs,
dsb., Q. Bn. u. Nranqm (1903) 189 T.R. 383; OZssdqrnm u. aZqjDtcnqZ
(1903) 190 T.R. 169; GnvZqc u. Ekdlhmf, (1903) 191 T.R. 126; zqatbjkd
a. AkZbjatqm, (1903) 191 T.R. 405; Cdonrhs AZmj a. EqZmjenqs (1903) 191
T.R. 499; Rodmbdq u. CtokZm Rhkj Bn. (1903) 191 T.R. 526; VZaZrg Q. Bn.
u. OdZqbd, (1904) 192 T.R. 179; Qnfdqr u. zkZaZlZ (1904) 192 T.R. 226;
Rntsg CZjnsZ u. Mnqsg BZqnkhmZ (1904) 192 T.R. 286; AZmjdqr Lts.
BZrtZksx Bn. u. LhmmdZonkhr, dsb., Q. Bn. (1904) 192 T.R. 371; Roqdbjdkr
RtfZq Qdehmhmf Bn. u. LbBHZhm (1904) 192 T.R. 397. 
(44) T.R. u. Hmrtqfdmsr, (1795) 2 CZkk. T.R. 335; T.R. u. Lhsbgdkk
(1795) 2 CZkk. T.R. 348; Dw o. AnkklZm, (1807) 4 BqZmbg T.R. 75; Atqq'r
SqhZk, 4 BqZmbg T.R. 469. 
   "Sn oqdudms sgd onrrhahkhsx ne sgnrd bZkZlhshdr vghbg qdrtks eqnl sgd
dwsdmrhnm ne sqdZrnm sn needmrdr ne lhmnq hlonqsZmbd, sgZs fqdZs
etmcZldmsZk kZv vghbg cdehmdr Zmc khlhsr sgd uZqhntr cdoZqsldmsr ne ntq
fnudqmldms gZr fhudm Z qtkd nm sgd rtaidbs ansg sn sgd kdfhrkZstqd Zmc
sgd bntqsr ne zldqhbZ, vghbg mdhsgdq bZm ad odqlhssd4 sn sqZmrbdmc.
`SqdZshnm ZfZhmrs sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr rgZkk bnmrhrs nmkx hm kduxhmf vZq
ZfZhmrs sgdl, nq hm Zcgdqhmf sn sgdhq dmdlhdr. fhuhmf sgdl Zhc Zmc
bnlenqs.'" Odq Lq. Bghde Itrshbd LZqrgZkk, Hm Dw o. CnHkKmZm, (1807) 4
BqZmbg T.R. 128. Rdd Zkrn T.R. u. Gnwhd, (1808) H OZhmd T.R. 265. 
   "Hm sgd dZqkhdq odqhncr ne Dmfkhrg ghrsnqx, sgd itcfdr vdqd nesdm sgd
okhZms snnkr ne sgd jhmf, Zmc dwdqbhrdc sgd onvdq ne otmhrghmf enq
b-nmrsqtbshud sqdZrnmr, tmcdq bhqbtlrsZmbdr sgd lnrs qdunkshmf Zmc
fqdZskx sn sgd nooqdrrhnm ne hmmnbdms odqrnmr. Sgd vhrd Zmc rZfZbhntr
eqZldqr ne ntq Bnmrshstshnm gZud deedbstZkkx ftZqcdc ZfZhmrs rtbgZatrdr
ne onvdq, ax cdbkZqhmf sgdqd rgZkk ad mn bnmuhbshnm enq sghr ghfg bqhld
nm ldqd rtrohbhnm nq nm oqnne ne Zmx eZbs vghbg hr mns Zm nudqs Zbs ne
sqdZrnm drsZahkhrgdc ax svn vhsmdrrdr. BgZqfd sn FqZmc Itqx, (1861) 1
Anmc T.R. 610. 
 
(45) Ahfdknv u. Enqqdrs, (1869) 9 VZkk. T.R. 330; CZx u. Lhbnt, (1873)
18 VZkk. T.R. 156; Dw o. KZmfd, (1873) 18 VZkk. T.R. 163; VZkkZbg u. UZm
Qhrvhbj, (1876) 92 T.R. 202; T.R. u. Ctmmhmfsnm. (1892) 146 T.R. 338.

   "VgZs vZr hmsdmcdc ax sgd bnmrshstshnmZk oqnuhrhnm hr eqdd eqnl cntas.
Hm DmfkZmc, ZssZhmcdqr ne sqdZrnm vnqjdc bnqqtoshnm ne aknnc Zmc
odqodstZk enqedhstqd ne sgd drsZsd ne sgd odqrnm ZssZhmsdc, sn sgd
chrhmgdqhrnm ne ghr gdhqr, nq ne sgnrd vgn vntkc nsgdqvhrZ ad ghr gdhqr.
Sgtr hmmnbdms bghkcqdm vdqd lZcZ sn rteedq adbZtrd ne sgd needmrd ne
sgdhq Zmbdrsnq. Vgdm sgd EdcdqZk Bnmrshstshnm vZr eqZldc, sghr vZr edks
sn ad Z fqdZs gZqcrgho, Zmc dudm qZmj hmitrshbd. Enq sghr qdZrnm, hs vZr
nqcqZhmdc sgZs mn ZssZhmcdq ne sqdZrnm rgntkc vnqj bnqqtoshnm ne aknnc
nq enqedhstqd, dwbdos ctqhmf sgd khed ne sgd odqrnm ZssZhmsdc." VZkkZbg
u. UZm Qhrvhbj, (1875) 92 T.R. 210. 
(46) Lhkkr u. Ctqxdd (1813) 7 BqZmbg T.R. 481; GZlosnm  u. L'Bnmmdk 
(1818) 3 VgdZs. T.R. 234; LZxgdv u. SgZsbgdq (1821) 6 VgdZs T.R. 129;
CZqax u. LZxdq, (1825) 10 VgdZs. T.R. 465; T.R. u. zldcx, (1826) 11
VgdZs. T.R. 302; BZkcvdkk u. BZqqhmfsnm, (1835) 9 Ods. T.R. 86;
L'Dklnxkd u. Bngdm (1830) 13 Ods. T.R. 312, ztftrsZ Atmj u. DZqkd,
(1839) 13 Ods. T.R. 519; zkZaZlZ RsZsd AZmj u. CZksnm, (1850) 9 Gtv.
T.R. 622; C'zqdx u. Jdsbgtl (1850) 11 Gnv. T.R. 165; BgqhrslZr u.
Qtrrdkk, (1866) 5 VZkk. T.R. 200; Fqddm u. UZm Atrjhqj, (1868) 7 VZkk.
T.R. 130; OZtk u. UhqfhmhZ, (1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 168; AnZqc ne Otakhb
Vnqjr u. BnktlahZ Btkkdfd (1873) 17 VZkk. T.R. 521; Sgnlornm u. VghslZm
(1873) 18 VZkk. T.R. 457; Odmmnxdq u. Mdee (1877) 95 T.R. 714; AnmZoZqsd
u. zoodZk SZw Bs.. (1882) 104 T.R. 692; Qnadqsrnm u. Ohbjqdkk, (1883)
100 T.R. 608; Aqnvm u. Gntrsnm (1885) 114 T.R. 622; GZmkdx u.. Cnmnfgtd,
(1885) 116 T.R. 1; QdmZtc u. zaanss (1886) 116 T.R. 277; BghbZfn, dsb.,
Q. Bn. u. Vhffhmr Edqqx Bn., (1887) 119 T.R. 615; Anqdq u. BgZolZm
(1887) 110 T.R. 587; Bnkd u. BtmmhmfgZl (1890) 133 T.R. 107; Akntms u.
VZkjdq (1890) 134 T.R. 607; Rhllnmr u. RZtk (1891) 138 T.R. 439;
Qdxmnkcr u. Rsnbjsnm (1891) 140 T.R. 254; BZqodmsdq u. RsqZmfd (189k)
141 T.R. 87; Gtmshmfsnm u. zssqhkk, (1892) 146 T.R. 657; Fkdmm u. FZqsg,
(1893) 147 T.R. 360; KZhmf u. Qhfmdx, (1896) 160 T.R. 531; BghbZfn,
dsb., Q. Bn. u. Rstql, (1890) 174 T.R. 710; SgnqlZmm u. EqZld, (1900)
178 T.R. 350; GZmbnbj MZs. AZmj u. EZqmtl, (1900) 176 T.R. 640; BkZqjd
u. BkZqjd, (1900) 178 T.R. 186; Vhkjdr Bntmsx u. Bnkdq, (1901) 180 T.R.
506; V. V. BZqfhkk Bn. u. LhmmdrnsZ, (1901) 180 T.R. 452; Ingmrnm u. Mdv
Xnqj K. Hmr. Bn., (1903) 187 T.R. 491; zmcqdvr u. zmcqdvr, (1903) 188
T.R. 14; AkZbjrsnmd u. Lhkkdq, (1903) 188 T.R. 180; Ehmmdx u. Ftx (1903)
189 T.R. 335; VZaZrg Q. Bn. u. EkZmmhfZm, (1904) 192 T.R. 29; FdqlZmm
RZu., dsb., Rnb. u. Cnqlhsydq, (1904) 192 T.R. 125; Vdcchmf u. Ldxdq,
(1904) 192 T.R. 573.  
(47) T.R. AZmj u. CdudZtw, (1809) 5 BqZmbg T.R. 61; FZrrhdr u. AZkknm,
(1832) 6 Ods. T.R. 761; Qgncd HrkZmc u. LZrrZbgtrdsssr (1838) 12 Ods.
T.R. 657; ztftrsZ AZmj u. DZqkd (1839) 13 Ods. T.R. 519; Lnnqd u.
Hkkhmnhr, (1852) 14 Gnv. T.R. 13; Bnmmdq u. Dkkhnss, (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R.
591; Cqdc Rbnss u. RZmcenqc (1856) 19 Gnv. T.R. 393; BqZmcZkk u. MduZcZ
(1867) 6 VZkk. T.R. 35; Vnncqtee u. OZqgZl, (1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 123;
OZtk u. UhqfhmhZ (1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 168; CnvmgZl u. zkdwZmcqhZ (1869)
10 VZkk. T.R. 173; Khudqonnk Hmr. Bn. u. LZrrZbgtrdssr (1870) 10 VZkk.
T.R. 566; VZqc u. LZqxkZmc, (1870) 12 VZkk. T.R. 418; RkZtfgsdq-Gntrd
BZrdr (1872) 16 VZkk. T.R. 36; AqZcvdkk u. RsZsd, (1872) 18 VZkk. T.R.
130; Bgdltmf BZmZk AZmj u. Knvdqx, (1876) 93 T.R. 72; LbBqdZcx u.
UhqfhmhZ, (1876) 104 T.R. 391; OghkZcdkoghZ Ehqd zrrnb. u. Mdv Xnqj,
(1886) 119 T.R. 110; OdlahmZ Bnmrnk. Rhkudq Lhm., dsb., Bn. u.
OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1888) 125 T.R. 181; Jhllhrg u. AZkk, (1889) 129 T.R. 217;
Bnkd u. BtmmhmfgZl, (1890) 133 T.R. 107; LZmbgdrsdq u. LZrrZbgtrdssr,
(1891) 139 T.R. 240; Ohssratqf, dsb., BnZk Bn. u. AZsdr, (1895) 156 T.R.
577; UZmbd u. V. z. UZmcdqbnbj Bn., (1898) 170 T.R. 438; AkZjd u.
LbBktmf, (1898) 172 T.R. 239; VhkkhZlr u. EdZqr, (1900) 179 T.R. 270;
SqZudkkdqr, Hmr. Bn. u. Bnmmdbshbts, (1902) 165 T.R. 364; BgZcvhbj u.
Jdkkdx, (1903) 187 T.R. 540; ChZlnmc Fktd Bn. u. T.R. Fktd Bn., (1903)
187 T.R. 611; AkZbjrsnmd u. Lhkkdq, (1903) 188 T.R. 189; zmfkn-zldqhbZm
Oqnuhrhnm Bn. u. CZuhr Oqnuhrhnm Bn., (1903) 191 T.R. 373. 
   "Sgd Bnmrshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr cdbkZqdr sgZs sgd bhshydmr ne
dZbg RsZsd rgZkk ad dmshshdc sn Zkk sgd oqhuhkdfdr Zmc hlltmhshdr ne
bhshydmr hm sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr. zmc Zksgntfg sgdrd oqhuhkdfdr Zmc
hlltmhshdr, enq fqdZsdq rZedsx, Zqd okZbdc tmcdq sgd ftZqchZmrgho ne sgd
fdmdqZk fnudqmldms, rshkk sgd RsZsdr lZx ax sgdhq kZvr Zmc hm sgdhq
sqhatmZkr oqnsdbs Zmc dmenqbd sgdl. Sgdx gZud mns nmkx sgd onvdq, ats
hs hr Z ctsx dminhmdc tonm sgdl ax sghr oqnuhhhhnm hm sgd Bnmrshstshnm."
Odq Lq. Itrshbd SZmdx, hm Oqhff u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1842) 16 Ods. T.R. 629.

(48) Gnkldr u. Idmmhrnm, (1840) 14 Ods. T.R. 540; Jdmstbjx u. Cdmmhrnm,
(1860) 24 Gnv. T.R. 66; SZxknq u. SZhmsnq, (1872) 16 VZkk. T.R. 366;
BZqqnkk Bntmsx u. Rlhsg (1884) 111 T.R. 556; Dw o. Qdffdk (1885) 114
T.R. 642; LZgnm u. Itrshbd (1888) 127 T.R. 700; KZrbdkkdr u. FdnqfhZ,
(1893) 148 T.R. 637; Tssdq u. EqZmjkhm. (1899) 172 T.R. 416. 
(49) Oqhff u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ, (1842) 16 Ods. T.R. 639; Inmdr u. UZm YZmcs,
(1847) 6 Gnv. T.R. 215; RsqZcdq u. FqZgZl (1850) 10 Gnv. T.R. 82, Lnnqd
u. Hkkhmnhr (1852) 14 Gnv. T.R. 13; Cqdc Rbnss u. RZmcenqc, (1856) 19
Gnv. T.R. 393; zakdlZm u. Annsg, (1858) 21 Gnv. T.R. 506., 
   "Dudqx RsZsd gZr Zm tmcntasdc qhfgs sn cdsdqlhmd sgd rsZstr, nq
cnldrshb Zmc rnbhZk bnmchshnm, ne sgd odqrnmr cnlhbhkdc vhsghm hsr
sdqqhsnqx; dwbdos hmrneZq Zr sgd onvdqr ne sgd RsZsdr hm sghr qdrodbs
Zqd qdrsqZhmdc, nq ctshdr Zmc nakhfZshnmr hlonrdc nm sgdl, ax sgd
Bnmrshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr." RsqZcdq u. FqZgZl, (1850) 10
Gnv.T.R. 93. 
(50) Ktsgdq u. Anqcdm. (1840) 7 Gnv. T.R. 1; SdwZr u. Vghsd. (1868) 7
VZkk. T.R. 700; Hm qd CtmbZm (1891) 139 T.R. 449; SZxknq u. AdbjgZl,
(1900) 178 T.R. 548. 
(51)    "Hs vZr nmd ne sgd naidbshnmr lnrs rdqhntrkx tqfdc ZfZhmrs sgd
mdv bnmrshstshnm ax sgnrd vgn noonrdc hsr qZshehbZshnm ax sgd RsZsdr,
sgZs hs bnmsZhmdc mn enqlZk Ahkk ne Qhfgsr. (EdcdqZkhrs. Mn.kwwwhu.) zmc
sgd RsZsd ne UhqfhmhZ ZbbnloZmhdc gdq qZshehbZshnm ax sgd qdbnldmcZshnm
ne Zm Zldmcldms dlancxhmf rtbg Z ahkk. (3 Dkkhns'r CdaZsdr, 661.) Sgd
eddkhmf nm sghr rtaidbs kdc sn sgd Zcnoshnm ne sgd ehqrs sdm Zldmcldmsr
sn sgZs hmrsqtldms Zs nmd shld, rgnqskx Zesdq sgd ftudqmldms, vZr
nqfZmhydc. Sgdrd Zqd Zkk cdrhfmdc sn nodqZsd Zr qdshsqZhmsr nm sgd
fdmdqZk fnudqmldms, Zmc lnrs ne sgdl enq sgd oqnsdbshnm ne oqhuZsd
qhfgsr ne odqrnmr Ztc oqnodqsx. MnsvhsrsZmchmf sghr qdoqnZbg, gnvdudq,
sgdqd Zqd lZmx oqnuhrhnmr hm sgd nqhfhmZk hmrsqtldms ne sghr kZssdq
bgZqZbsdq." Jqhmf u. Lhrrntqh (1882) 107 T.R. 226. 
(52) Sdqqdss u. SZxknq, (1815) 9 BqZmbg T.R. 43; UhcZk u. OghkZcdkoghZ,
(1844) 2 Gnv. T.R. 127; Dw o. FZqkZmc, (1866) 4 VZkk. T.R. 333; T.R. u.
BqthjrgZmj (1875) 92 T.R. 542; Qdxmnkcr u. T.R. (1878) 98 T.R. 145;
Rohdr u. Hkkhmnhr (1887) 123 T.R. 131; CZuhr u. AdZrnm, (1890) 133 T.R.
333; Dhkdmadbjdq u. Okxlntsg Bntmsx, (1890) 134 T.R. 31; Bgtqbg ne Idrtr
Bgqhrs u. T.R., (1890) 138 T.R. 1; Hm qd QZohdq (1892) 143 T.R. 110;
Gnqmdq u. T.R., (1892) 143 T.R. 207; AqZcehdkc u. Qnadqsr (1899) 175
T.R. 291. 
(53)    "Sgd qhfgs ne sgd odnokd odZbdZakx sn Zrrdlakd enq sghr otqonrd
ne odshshnmhmf Bnmfqdrr enq Z qdcqdrr ne fqhduZmbdr, nq enq Zmxsghmf
dkrd bnmmdbsdc vhsg sgd onvdqr nq sgd ctshdr ne sgd mZshnmZk fnudqmldms,
hr Zm Zssqhatsd ne mZshnmZk bhshydmrgho, Zmc, Zr rtbg, tmcdq sgd
oqnsdbshnm ne, Zmc ftZqZmsddc ax, sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. Sgd udqx hcdZ ne
Z fnudqmldms, qdotakhbZm hm enql, hlokhdr Z qhfgs nm sgd oZqs ne hsr
bhshydmr sn ldds odZbdZakx enq bnmrtksZshnm hm qdrodbs sn otakhb ZeeZhqr
Zmc sn odshshnm enq Z qdcqdrr ne fqhduZmbdr." T.R. u. BqthjrgZmj (1875)
92 T.R. 552. 
(54) Oqdrrdq u. Hkkhmnhr (1886) 116 T.R. 252; Rohdr u. Hkkhmnhr (1887)
123 T.R. 131; Dhkdmaddjdq u. Okxlntsg Bntmsx, (1890) 134 T.R. 31. 
   "Sghr hr mns Z qhfgs fqZmsdc ax sgd Bnmrshstshnm. Mdhsgdq hr hs hm Zmx
lZmmdq cdodmcdms tonm sgZs hmrsqtldms enq hsr dwhrsdmbd. Sgd Rdbnmc
zldmcldms cdbkZqdr sgZs hs rgZkk mns ad hmeqhmfdc; ats sghr, Zr gZr addm
rddm, ldZmr mn lnqd sgZm sgZs hs rgZkk mns ad hmeqhmfdc ax Bnmfqdrr.
Sghr hr nmd ne sgd Zldmcldmsr sgZs gZr mn nsgdq deedbs sgZm sn qdrsqhbs
sgd onvdqr ne sgd mZshnmZk fnudqmldms, kdZuhmf sgd odnokd sn knnj enq
sgdhq oqnsdbshnm ZfZhmrs Zmx uhnkZshnm ax sgdhq edkknv-bhshydmr ne sgd
qhfgsr hs qdbnfmhydr, sn vgZs hr bZkkdc, hm Sgd Bhsx ne Mdv Xnqj u.
Lhkm, (1837) 11 Ods. T.R. 139, sgd onvdqr vghbg qdkZsd sn ldqdkx
ltmhbhoZk kdfhrkZshnm, nq vgZs vZr, odqgZor, lnqd oqnodqkx bZkkdc
hmsdqmZk onkhbd,' `mns rtqqdmcdqdc nq qdrsqZhmdc' ax sgd Bnmrshstshnm
ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr." T.R. u. BqthjrgZmj, (1875) 92 T.R. 553. 
(55) Rlhsg u. LZqxkZmc, (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R. 71; LtqqZx u. Gnanjdm KZmc,
dsb., Bn., (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R. 272; Dw o. LhkkhfZm (1866) 4 VZkk. T.R.
2; Anxc u. T.R., (1886) 116 T.R. 616; Rohdr u. Hkkhmnhr (1887) 123 T.R.
131; Dhkdmaddjdq u. Okxlntsg Bntmsx (1890) 134 T.R. 31; Enmf Xtd Shmf
u. T.R., (1893) 149 T.R. 608; HmsdqrsZsd Bnlldqbd Bnllhrrhnm u. Aqhlrnm,
(1894) 154 T.R. 447; Hm qd BgZolZm, (1897) 166 T.R. 661; zcZlr u. Mdv
Xnqj, (1904) 192 T.R. 585. 
(56) Sgd rdbtqhsx hmsdmcdc sn ad ftZqZmsdrc ax sgd Entqsg zldmcldms
ZfZhmrs 
vqnmfetk rdZqbg Zmc rdhytqd hr cdrhfmdc sn oqdudms uhnkZshnmr ne oqhuZsd
rdbtqhsx hm odqrnm Zmc oqnodqsx Zmc tmkZvetk hmuZrhnm ne sgd rZmbshsx
ne sgd gnld ne sgd bhshydm ax neehbdqr ne sgd kZv, Zbshmf tmcdq
kdfhrkZshud nq itchbhZk rZmbshnm, Zmc sn fhud qdldcx ZfZhmrs rtbg
trtqoZshnmr vgdm Zssdlosdc. Ats sgd Dmfkhrg Zmc mdZqkx Zkk ne sgd
zldqhbZm bZrdr gZud cdbkhmdc sn dwsdmc sghr cnbsqhmd sn sgd dwsdms ne
dwbktchmf sdrshlnmx vghbg gZr addm nasZhmdc ax rtbg ldZmr, he hs hr
nsgdqvhrd bnlodsdms." zcZlr u. Mdv Xnqj, (19N4) 192 T.R. 598. 
(57) T.R. u. Odqdy (1824) 9 VgdZs. T.R. 579; AZqqnm u. AZkshlnqd. (1833)
7 Ods. T.R. 243; Enw u. Nghn (1847) 5 Gnv. T.R. 410; Vdrs Qhudq Aqhcfd
Bn. u. Chw, (1848) 6 Gnv. T.R. 507; Lhsbgdkk u. GZqlnmx (1851) 13 Gnv.
T.R. 115; Lnnqd u. Hkkhmnhr (1852) 14 Gnv. T.R. 13; LtqqZx u. Gnanjdm
KZmc, dsb., Bn., (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R. 272; Cxmdr u. Gnnudq, (1857) 20
Gnv. T.R. 65; Vhsgdqr u. Atbjkdx, (1857) 20 Gnv. T.R. 84; FhklZm u.
RgdanxfZm (1862) 2 AkZbj T.R. 510; Dw o. LhkkhfZm, (1866) 4 VZkk. T.R.
2; Svhsbgdkk u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ, (1868) 7 VZkk. T.R. 321; Gdoatqm u.
Fqhrvnkc, (1869) 8 VZkk. T.R. 603; Lhkkdq u. T.R., (1870) 11 VZkk. T.R.
268; KdfZk Sdmcdq BZrdr (1870) 12 VZkk. T.R. 457; Otlodkkx u. Fqddm AZx,
dsb., BZmZk Bn., (1871) 13 VZkk. T.R. 166; Nranqm u. Mhbgnkrnm, (187k)
13 VZkk. T.R. 654; Dw o. KZmfd (1873) 18 VZkk. T.R. 163; Jngk u. T.R.,
(1875) 91 T.R. 367; CZuhcrnm u. Mdv NqkdZmr (1877) 96 T.R. 97; Rhmjhmf
Etmc BZrdr (1878) 99 T.R. 700; KZmfenqc u. T.R., (1879) 101 T.R. 341,
Jdkkx u. Ohssratqfg, (1881) 104 T.R. 78; Dw o. VZkk (1882) 107 T.R. 265;
T.R. u. Inmdr (1883) 109 T.R. 513; T.R. u. FqdZs EZkkr Lef. Bn., (1884)
112 T.R. 645; Dw o. Vhkrnm (1885) 114 T.R. 417; Anxc u. T.R., (1886) 116
T.R. 616; LZbjhm u. T.R., (1886) 117 T.R. 348; Dw o. AZhm (1887) 121
T.R. 1; OZqjhmrnm u. T.R., (1887) 121 T.R. 281; Rohdr u. Hkkhmnhr,
(1887) 123 T.R. 131; BZkkZm u. Vhkrnm (1888) 127 T.R. 540; T.R. u. Cd
VZks (1888) 128 T.R. 393; LZmmhmf u. Eqdmbg, (1890) 133 T.R. 186;
Dhkdmadbjdq u. Okxlntsg Bntmsx, (1890) 134 T.R. 31; Knthruhkkd, dsb. Q.
Bn. u. Vnncrnm (1890) 134 T.R. 614; Hm qd Qnrr, (1891) 140 T.R. 453;
BntmrdklZm u. Ghsbgbnbj, (1892) 142 T.R. 547; Rhllnmr u. T.R. (1891) 142
T.R. 148; Sgnqhmfsnm u. Lnmsfnldqx (1893) 147 T.R. 490; LnmnmfZgdkZ MZu.
Bn. u. T.R., (1893) 148 T.R. 312; Enmf Xtd Shmf u. T.R., (1893) 149 T.R.
698; Kddr u. T.R. (1893) 150 T.R. 476; LZqbgZms u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ Q. Bn.,
(1894) 153 T.R. 380; Khmenqc u. Dkkhrnm, (1894) 155 T.R. 503; Ingmrnm
u. RZxqd, (1895) 158 T.R. 100; Rvdds u. Qdbgdk (1895) 159 T.R. 380;
Aqnvm u. VZkjdq. (1896) 161 T.R. 591; Vnmf Vhmf u. T.R., (1996) 163 T.R.
228; SZksnm u. LZxdr (1896) 163 T.R. 376; AZtlZm u. Qnrr, (1897) 167
T.R. 648; Vhkrnm u. KZladqs, (1898) 168 T.R. 611; T.R. u. Inhms SqZeehb
zrrnb. (1898) 171 T.R. 505; LZwvdkk u. Cnv (1900) 176 T.R. 581; RbqZmsnm
u. Vgddkdq, (1900) 170 T.R. 141; LbCnmZkc u. LZrrZbgtrdssr (1901) 180
T.R. 311; Mddkx u. Gdmjdk, (1901) 180 T.R. 109; Eqdmbg u. AZqadq zrogZks
OZuhmf Bn., (1901) 181 T.R. 324; Vhfgs u. CZuhcrnm, (1901)181 T.R. 371;
SnmZvZmcZ u. Kxnm (1901) 181 T.R. 389; BZohsZk Bhsx CZhqx Bn. u. Nghn
(1902) 183 T.R. 238; GZmnudq MZs. AZmj u. Lnxrdr (1902) 186 T.R. 181;
Cqdxdq u. Hkkhmnhr (1902) 187 T.R. 71; Knmd Vnke u. Ghsbgbnbj (1903) 187
T.R. 553; T.R. u. KxmZg (1903) 188 T.R. 445; IZoZmdrd HllhfqZms BZrd
(1903) 189 T.R. 86; GZvZhh u. LZmjhbgh (1903) 190 T.R. 197; Adcenqc u.
T.R.. (1904) 192 T.R. 217; Atssehdkc u. RsqZmZgZm (1904) 192 T.R. 470;
zcZlr u. Mdv Xnqj, (1904) 192 T.R. 585. 
(58) Rdd bZrdr bhsdc hm mnsd 2, rtoqZ. 
(59) Rdd bZrdr bhsdc hm mnsd 2, rtoqZ. 
(60) Rdd bZrdr bhsdc hm mnsd 2, rtoqZ. 
(61) Rdd bZrdr bhsdc hm mnsd 2, rtoqZ. 
(62) T.R. u. Bnnkhcfd, (1816) 1 VgdZs. T.R. 415; Dw o. JdZqmdx, (1822)
7 VgdZs. T.R. 38; T.R. u. Lhkkr, (1833) 7 Ods. T.R. 142; AZqqnm u.
AZkshlnqd, (1833) 7 Ods. T.R. 243; Enw u. Nghn, (1847) 5 gnv. T.R. 410;
Vhsgdqr u. Atbjkdx, (1857) 20 Gnv. T.R. 84; Dw o. LhkkhfZm, (1866) 4
VZkk. T.R. 2; Svhsbgdkk u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1868) 7 VZkk. T.R. 321; Lhkkdq
u. T.R. (1870) 11 VZkk. T.R. 268; T.R. u. Bnnj, (1872) 17 VZkk. T.R.
168; T.R. u. BqthjrgZmj, (1875) 92 T.R. 542; Qdxmnkcr u. T.R., (1878)
98 T.R. 145; Rohdr u. Hkkhmnhr, (1887) 123 T.R. 131; Aqnnjr u. Lhrrntqh,
(1888) 124 T.R. 394; BZkkZm u. Vhkrnm, (1898) 127 T.R. 540; Ddkdmadbjdq
u. Okxlntsg Bntmsx, (1890) 134 T.R. 31; Inmdr u. T.R., (1890) 137 T.R.
202; Bnnj u. T.R., (1891) 138 T.R. 157; Hm qd RghatxZ Itfhqn, (1891) 140
T.R. 291; Hm qd Qnrr (1891) 140 T.R. 453; Enmf Xtd Shmf u. T.R., (1893)
149 T.R. 698; LZssnw u. T.R. (1895) 156 T.R. 237; Qnrdm u. T.R. (1896)
161 T.R. 29; T.R. u. Ytbjdq, (1896) 161 T.R. 475; Vnmf Vhmf u. T.R.
(1896) 163 T.R. 228; Sgnlornm u. TsZg, (1898) 170 T.R. 343; LZwvdkk u.
Cnv, (1900) 176 T.R. 581; Lnsdr u. T.R. (1900) 178 T.R. 458; Ehcdkhsx,
dsb, Bn. u. T.R.. (1902) 187 T.R. 315; GZvZhh u. LZmjhbgd (1903) 190
T.R. 197. 
(63) T.R. u. KZ UdmfdZmbd, (1796) 3 CZkk. T.R. 297; BnktlahZ AZmj u.
Njdkx, (1819) 4 VgdZs. T.R. 235; OZqrnmr u. Adcenqc. (1830) 3 Ods. T.R.
433; Khuhmfrsnm u. Lnnqd, (1833) 7 Ods. T.R. 469; Vdarsdq u. Qdhc,
(1850) 11 Gnv. T.R. 437; OdmmrxkuZmhZ u. VgddkhZf, dsb., Aqhcfd Bn.,
(1851) 13 Gnv. T.R. 518; Itrshbdr u. LtqqZx, (1869) 9 VZkk. T.R. 274;
DcvZqcr u. Dkkhnss, (1874) 21 VZkk. T.R. 532; OdZqrnm u. XdvcZkk, (1877)
95 T.R. 294; LdDkqZsg u. T.R. (1880) 102 T.R. 426; Rohdr u. Hkkhmnhr
(1887) 123 T.R. 131; zqjZmrZr UZkkdx KZmc. dsb., Bn. u. LZmm (1889) 130
T.R. 69; Dhkdmadbjdq u. Okxlntsg Bntmsx. (1890) 134 T.R. 31; VghsdgdZc
u. RgZsstbj, (1891), 138 T.R. 146; Rbnss u. Mddkx, (1891) 140 T.R. 106;
BZsdr u. zkkdm (1893) 149 T.R. 451; Enmf Xtd Shmf u. T.R., (1893) 149
T.R. 698; BntfgqZm u. Ahfdknv, (1896) 164 T.R. 301; VZkjdq u. Mdv
Ldwhbn, dsb., Q. Bn.. (1897) 165 T.R. 693; BghbZfn, dsb., Q. Bn. u.
BghbZfn (1897) 166 T.R. 226; zldqhbZm Ota. Bn. u. Ehrgdq (1897) 166 T.R.
464; Ehcdkhsx, dsb., Bn. u. T.R. (1902) 187 T.R. 315. 
(64) Rl bZ"c bhsdc hm mnsd 1, rtoqZ. 
(65) OdqudZq u. LZrrZbgtrdssr (1866) 5 VZkk. T.R. 475; Rohdr u. Hkkhmnhr
(1887) 123 T.R. 131; LZmmhmf u. Eqdmbg, (1890)  133 T.R. 186;
Dhkdmadbjdq u. Okxlntsg Bntmsx, (1890) 134 T.R. 31; LbDkuZhmd u. Aqtrg,
(1891) 142 T.R. 155, N'Mdhkh u. Udqlnms, (1892) 144 T.R. 323; LbCnmZkc
u. LZrrZbgtrrdssr (1901) 180 T.R. 311. 
(66) Khuhmfrsnm u. Lnnqd, (1833) 7 Ods. T.R. 469; Rohdr u. Hkkhmnhr
(1887) 123 T.R. 131. 
   "Sghr fnudqmldms hr Zbjmnvkdcfdc ax Zkk sn ad nmd ne dmtldqZsdc
onvdqr. Sgd oqhmbhokd, sgZs hs bZm dwdqbhrd nmkx sgd onvdqr fqZmsdc sn
hs, vntkc rddl snn ZooZqdms sn gZud qdpthqdc sn ad dmenqbdc ax Zkk sgnrd
Zqftldmsr vghbg hsr dmkhfgsdmdc eqhdmcr, vghkd hs vZr cdodmchmf adenqd
sgd odnokd, entmc hs mdbdrrZqx sn tqfd. SgZs oqhmbhokd hr mnv
tmhudqrZkkx Zclhssdc. Ats sgd ptdrshnm qdrodbshmf sgd dwsdms ne sgd
onvdqr ZbstZkkx fqZmsdc hr odqodstZkkx Zqhrhmf, Zmc vhkk oqnaZakx
bnmshmtd sn Zqhrd, Zr knmf Zr ntq rxrsdl rgZkk dwhrs." L'Btkknbg u.
LZqxkZmc, (1819) 4 VgdZs. T.R. 405. 
(67) Bghrgnkl u. FdnqfhZ. (1793) 2 CZkk. T.R. 419; Gnkkhmfrvnqsg u.
UhqfhmhZ, (1798) 3 CZkk. T.R. 378; LZqshm u. Gtmsdq, (1816) 1 VgdZs.
T.R. 304; L'Btkknbg u. LZqxkZmc. (1819) 4 VgdZs. T.R. 316; zmcdqrnm u.
Ctmm, (1821) 6 VgdZs T.R. 204; Bngdm u. UhqfhmhZ (1821) 6 VgdZs T.R.
264; Nranqm u. T.R. AZmj (1824) 9 VgdZs. T.R. 738; Atbjmdq u. Ehmkdx,
(1829) 2 Ods. T.R. 586; zakdlZm u. Annsg, (1858) 21 Gnv. T.R. 506;
Bnkkdbsnq u. CZx, (1870) 11 VZkk. T.R. 113; BkZeehm u. GntrdlZm, (1876)
93 T.R. 130; HmlZm RsdZlrgho Bn. u. Shmjdq, (1876) 94 T.R. 238; T.R. u.
Enw. (1876) 94 T.R. 315; Sdmmdrrdd u. CZuhr (1879) 100 T.R. 257; Rohdr
u. Hkkhmnhr, (1887) 123 T.R. 131; Onkknbj u. EZqldqr' K & S. Bn., (1895)
157 T.R. 429; Enqrxsg u. GZllnmc, (1897) 166 T, R. 506; Rs. zmsgnmx
EZkkr VZsdq Onvdq Bn. u. Rs. OZtk VZsdq Bnl'qr, (1897) 168 T.R. 349;
Lhrrntqh, dsb., Q. Bn., u. GZadq (1898) 169 T.R. 613; GZmbnbj Lts. K
Hmr. Bn. u. VZqqdm, (1901) 181 T.R. 73; JZmrZr u. BnknqZcn. 185 T.R.
125; zmcqdvr u. zmcqdvr (1903) 188 T.R. 14; Bgtqbg u. Jdkrdx, (1887) 121
T.R. 282; NtZbghsZ OZbjds Bn. u. zhjdm, (1887) 127 T.R. 444; Vdrsdqm
Tmhnm Sdk. Bn. u. Odmckdsnm. (1887) 122 T.R. 347; AnvlZm u. BghbZfn,
dsb. Q. Bn.. (1888) 126 T.R. 465; LZgnm u. Itrshbd (1888) 127 T.R. 700;
Kdhrx u. GZqchm (1890) 135 T.R. 100; LZmbgdrsdq u. LZrrZbgtrdssr (1891)
139 T.R. 240. 
   "Sgd odqodsthsx Zmc hmchrrnktahkhsx ne sgd Tmhnm ax mn ldZmr hlokhdr
sgd knrr ne chrshmbs Zmc hmchuhctZk dwrsdmbd, nq ne sgd qhfgs ne
rdke-fnudqmldms ax sgd RsZsdr. Tmcdq sgd zqshbkdr ne BnmedcdqZshnm dZbg
RsZsd qdsZhmdc hsr rnudqdhfmsx, eqddcnl, Zmc hmcdodmcdmbd, Zmc dudqx
onvdq, itqhrchbshnm, Zmc qhfgs mns dwoqdrrkx cdkdfZsdc sn sgd Tmhsdc
RsZsdr. Tmcdq sgd Bnmrshstshnm, sgntfg sgd onvdqr ne sgd RsZsdr vdqd
ltbg qdrsqhbsdc, rshkk, Zkk onvdqr mns cdkdfZsdc sn sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr,
mnq oqnghahsdc sn sgd RsZsdr, Zqd qdrdqudc sn sgd RsZsdr qdrodbshudkx,
nq sn sgd odnokd.... Mns nmkx, sgdqdenqd, bZm sgdqd ad mn knrr ne
rdoZqZsd Zmc hmcdodmcdms Ztsnmnlx sn sgd RsZsdr, sgqntfg sgdhq tmhnm
tmcdq sgd Bnmrshstshnm, ats hs lZx ad mns tmqdZrnmZakx rZhc sgZs sgd
oqdrdquZshnm ne sgd RsZsdr, Zmc sgd lZhmsdmZmbd ne sgdhq fnudqmldmsr,
Zqd Zr ltbg vhsghm sgd cdrhfm Zmc bZqd ne sgd bnmrshstshnm Zr sgd
oqdrdquZshnm ne sgd Tmhnm Zmc sgd lZhmsdmZmbd ne sgd mZshnmZk
fnudqmldms. Sgd Bnmrshstshnm, hm Zkk hsr oqnuhrhnmr, knnjr sn Zm
hmcdrsqtbshakd Tmhnm, bnlonrdc ne hmcdrsqtbshakd RsZsdr." SdwZr u.
Vghsd, (1868) 7 VZkk. T.R. 700. 
(68) Nghn u. Cnkkhrnm. (1904) 194 T.R. 445. 
   "SgZs sgd ehqrs sdm Zqshbkdr ne Zldmcldmsvdqd mns hmsdmcdc sn khlhs
sgd onvdqr nesgd RsZsd fnudqmldmsr hm qdrodbs sn sgdhq nvm odnokd, ats
sn nodqZsd nm sgd mZshnmZk fnudqmldms Zknmd, vZr cdbhcdc lnqd sgZm Z
gZke bdmstqx Zfn, Zmc sgZs cdbhrhnm gZr addm rsdZchkx Zcgdqdc sn rhmbd."
Rohdr u. Hkkhmnhr (1887) 123 T.R. 166. 
(69) "zoonqshnmldms hr Zm nodqZshnm nm RsZsdr, Zmc hmunkudr uZktZshnmr
Zmc Zrrdrrldmsr vghbg Zqd ZqahsqZqx, Zmc rgntkc mns ad qdrnqsdc sn ats
hm bZrd ne mdbdrrhsx. Tmhenqlhsx hr Zm hmrsZms nodqZshnm nm hmchuhctZkr,
vhsgnts sgd hmsdqudmshnm ne Zrrdrrldmsr, nq Zmx qdfZqc sn RsZsdr, Zmc
hr Zs nmbd dZrx, bdqsZhm, Zmc deehbZbhntr." Odq OZssdqrnm, I., hm Gxksnm
u. T.R. (1794) 3 CZkk. T.R. 180. 
(70) (1895) 157 T.R. 429, 158 T.R. 601. 
(71) (1880) 103 T.R. 168. 
(72) (1824) 9 VgdZs. T.R. 1. 
(73) (1824) 9 VgdZs. T.R. 1. 
(74) Mnqsgdqm Rdbtqhshdr Bn. u. T.R. (1904) 193 T.R. 197. 
(75) Sgd onvdq bnmedqqdc ax sghr oqnuhrhnm ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm "hr sgd
onvdq sn qdftkZsd; sgZs hr, sn oqdrbqhad sgd qtkd ax vghbg bnlldqbd hr
sn ad fnudqmdc. Sghr onvdq, khjd Zkk nsgdqr udrsdc hm Bnmfqdrr, hr
bnlokdsd hm hsrdke, lZx ad dwdqbhrdc sn hsr tslnrs dwsdms, Zmc
Zbjmnvkdcfdr mn khlhsZshnmr, nsgdq sgZm Zqd oqdrbqhadc hm sgd
Bnmrshstshnm." Odq Lq. Bghde Itrshbd LZqrgZkk, hm Fhaanmr u. Nfcdm
(1824) 9 VgdZs. T.R. 197. 
(76)    "Sgd onvdq sn qdftkZsd bnlldqbd bnudqr Z vhcd ehdkc, Zmc dlaqZbdr
Z  fqdZs uZqhdsx ne rtaidbsr. Rnld ne sgdrd rtaidbsr bZkk enq tmhenql
qtkdr Zmc mZshnmZk kdfhrkZshnm; nsgdqr bZm ad adrs qdftkZsdc ax qtkdr
Zmc oqnuhrhnmr rtffdrsdc ax sgd uZqxhmf bhqbtlrsZmbdr ne cheedqdms
knbZkhshdr, Zmc khlhsdc hm sgdhq nodqZshnm sn rtbg knbZkhshdr
qdrodbshudkx. Sn sghr dwsdms sgd onvdq sn qdftkZsd bnlldqbd lZx ad
dwdqbhrdc ax sgd RsZsdr. Vgdsgdq sgd onvdq hm Zmx fhudm bZrd hr udrsdc
dwbktrhudkx hm sgd fdmdqZk fnudqmldms cdodmcr tonm sgd mZstqd ne sgd
rtaidbs sn ad qdftkZsdc." FhklZm u. OghkZcdkoghZ (1865) 3 VZkk. T.R.
726. Rdd Zkrn Bnnkdx u. AnZqc ne VZqcdmr (1851) 12 Gnv. T.R. 319. Dwo.
LbMhdk (1871) 13 VZkk T.R. 240; Lnahkd Bntmsx u. JhlaZkk (1881) 102 T.R.
691; VZkkhmf u. LhbghfZm (1886) 116 T.R. 455; Qnaahmr u. Rgdkax Bntmsx
SZwhmf Chrs. (1887) 120 T.R. 492. 
(77) Mnqsgdqm Rdbtqhshdr Bn. u. T. R., (1904) 193 T. R. 197. 
(78) LbBqdZcx u. UhqfhmhZ (1876) 94 T.R. 391. 
(79) Fddqu. Bnmmdbshbts (1896) 161 T.R. 519. 
(80) KZvsnm u. Rsddkd (1894) 152 T.R. 133.  
(81) 3 Ak. Bnl. 129. 
(82) Dw o. Xdqfdq, (1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 95. 
(83) Hm qd MdZfkd, (1890), 136 T. R. 1; Hm qd Eqdcdqhbg. (1893) 140 T.R.
70. 
(84) zakdlZm u. Annsg (1858) 21 Gnv. T.C. 506; SZqakd'r BZrd (187k) 13
VZkk. T.R. 397. 
(85) Sgd fqdZs Zmc kdZchmf hmsdms ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm Zmc sgd kZv ltrs
ad jdos bnmrsZmskx hm uhdv tonm sgd dwZlhmZshnm ne dudqx ptdrshnm ne
bnmrsqtbshnm. SgZs hmsdms, hm qdrodbs sn sgd vqhs ne gZadtr bnqotr, hr
lZmhedrs. Hs hr sgZs dudqx bhshydm lZx ad oqnsdbsdc ax itchbhZk Zbshnm
eqnl tmkZvetk hloqhrnmldms. Sn sgZs dmc sgd zbs ne 1789 oqnuhcdc sgZs
dudqx bntqs ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsd rgntkc gZud onvdq sn hrrtd sgd vqhs. Sgd
itqhrchbshnm sgtr fhudm hm kZv sn sgd bhqbths Zmc chrsqhbs bntqsr hr
nqhfhmZk; sgZs fhudm ax sgd Bnmrshstshnm Zmc sgd kZv sn sghr bntqs hm
ZoodkkZsd. Fhudm hm fdmdqZk sdqlr, hs ltrs mdbdrrZqhkx dwsdmc sn Zkk
bZrdr sn vghbg sgd itchbhZk onvdq ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr dwsdmcr, nsgdq
sgZm sgnrd dwoqdrrkx dwbdosdc eqnl hs." Dw o. Xdqfdq, (1868) 8 VZkk.
T.R. 101. 
(86) (1866) 4 VZkk. (T.R.) 2. 
(87) "Rn ltbg hlonqsZmbd chc sgd bnmudmshnm ZssZbg sn hs [sgd
oqnghahshnm ZfZhmrs sgd oZrrZfd ne Zmx dw onrs eZbsn kZv], sgZs hs hr
entmc svhbd hm sgd Bnmrshstshnm, ehqrs Zr Z qdrsqZhms tonm sgd onvdq ne
sgd fdmdqZk fnudqmldms, Zmc ZesdqvZqcr Zr Z khlhsZshnm tonm sgd
kdfhrkZshud onvdq ne sgd RsZsdr." Jqhmf u. Lhrrntqh, (1882) 107 T.R.
227. 
   "zkk sgd qdrsqhbshnmr bnmsZhmdc hm sgd Bnmrshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc
RsZsdr nm sgd onvdq ne sgd RsZsd kdfhrktstqdr vdqd oqnuhcdc hm eZunq ne
sgd Ztsgnqhsx ne sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms. Sgd oqnghahshnm ZfZhmrs sgdhq
lZjhmf Zmx dr onrs eZbsn kZvr vZr hmsqnctbdc enq fqdZsdq bZtshnm, Zmc
udqx oqnatakx Zqnrd eqnl sgd jmnvkdcfd sgZs, sgd OZqkhZldms ne FqdZs
AqhsZhm bkZhldc Zmc dwdqbhrdc Z onvdq sn oZrr rtbg kZvr, tmcdq sgd
cdmnlhmZshnm ne ahkkr ne tssZhmcdq. nq ahkkr ne oZhmr Zmc odmZkshdr."
BZkcdq u. Atkk (1798) 3 CZkk. T.R. 386. 
(88) Btllhmfr u. Lhrrntqh. (1866) 4 VZkk. T.R. 323. 
(89) (1866) 4 VZkk. T.R. 277. 
(90) (1866) 4 VZkk. T.R. 333. 
(91) Ekdsbgdq u. Odbj (1810) 6 BqZmbg T.R. 138. 
   "KZvr ne sghr bgZqZbsdq Zqd nooqdrrhud, tmitrs, Zmc sxqZmmhbZk; Zmc,
Zr rtbg, Zqd bnmcdlmdc ax sgd tmhudqrZk rdmsdmbd ne bhuhkhydc lZm. Sgd
hmitrshbd Zmc sxqZmmx vghbg bgZqZbsdqhydr dw Onrs eZbsn kZvr bnmrhrs
Zksnfssgdq hm sgdhq qdsqnrodbshud nodqZshnm, vhsg Zookhdc vhsg dptZk
enqbd, Zksgntfg mns dwbktrhudkx, sn ahkkr ne ZssZhmcdq." Nfcdm u.
RZtmcdqr, (1827) 12 VgdZs. T.R. 266. 
(92) BZqodmsdq u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ, (1854) 17 Gnv. T.R. 456. 
(93) "zr sgd bkZtrd vZr ehqrs Zcnosdc, sgd vnqcr bnmbdqmhmf bnmsqZbsr
vdqd mns hm hs, adbZtrd hs vZr rtoonrdc sgZs sgd ogqZrd,`dw Onrs eZbsn
kZv' hmbktcdc kZvr bnmbdqmhmf bnmsqZbsr Zr vdkk Zr nsgdqr. Ats hs vZr
ZrbdqsZhmdc adenqd sgd bnlokdshnm ne sgd hmrsqtldms sgZs sghr vZr Z
ogqZrd vghbg, hm Dmfkhrg itqhroqtcdmbd, gZc Zbpthqdc Z rhfmhehbZshnm
khlhsdc sn sgd bqhlhmZk kZv, Zmc sgd vnqcr `nq kZv hloZhqhmf sgd
nakhfZshnm ne bnmsqZbsr' vdqd Zccdc sn fhud rdbtqhsx sn qhfgsr qdrshmf
hm bnmsqZbsr. 2 AZmbqnes'r Ghrsnqx ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm, 213." Jqhmf u.
Lhrrntqh, (1882) 107 T. R. 227. 
   "Sgd duhk vghbg sghr hmghahshnm nm sgd RsZsdr vZr hmsdmcdc sn oqdudms
hr entmc hm sgd ghrsnqx ne ntq Qdunktshnm. Ax qdodZsdc Zbsr ne
kdfhrkZshnm hm sgd cheedqdms RsZsdr, ctqhmf sgZs dudmsetk odqhnc, sgd
nakhfZshnm ne bnmsqZbsr vZr hloZhqdc. Sgd shld Zmc lncd ne oZxldms vdqd
Zksdqdc ax kZv; Zmc rn eZq vZr sghr hmsdqedqdmbd ne kdfhrkZshnm bZqqhdc,
sgZs bnmehcdmbd adsvddm lZm Zmc lZm vZr vdkk-mhfg cdrsqnxdc. Sgnrd
oqnbddchmfr fqdv nts ne sgd oZodq rxrsdl ne sgZs cZx; Zmc sgd hmitqhdr
vghbg sgdx hmekhbsdc vdqd cddokx edks hm sgd bntmsqx Zs sgd shld sgd
Bnmrshstshnm vZr Zcnosdc. Sgd oqnuhrhnm vZr cdrhfmdc sn oqdudms sgd
RsZsdr eqnl enkknvhmf sgd oqdbdcdms ne kdfhrkZshnm rn cdlnqZkhyhmf hm
hsr deedbsr, Zmc rn cdrsqtbshud sn sgd bnlldqbhZk oqnrodqhsx ne Z
bntmsqx." Odq Lq. Itrshbd LbKdZm, hm BgZqkdr Qhudq Aqhcfd u. VZqqdm
Aqhcfd (1837) 11 Ods. T.R. 573. Rdd Zkrn DcvZqcr u. JdZqydx (1877) 96
T.R. 604, ds rdp. 
(94) (1837) 11 Ods. T.R. 420. 
(95) "Hs hr bnlodsdms enq sgd RsZsdr sn bgZmfd sgd enql ne sgd qdldcx,
nq sn lnchex hs nsgdqvhrd, Zr sgdx lZx rdd ehs, oqnuhcdc mn rtarsZmshZk
qhfgs rdbtqdc ax sgd bnmsqZbs hr sgdqdax hloZhqdc. Mn Zssdlos gZr addm
lZcd sn ehw cdehmhsdkx sgd khmd adsvddm ZksdqZshnmr ne sgd qdldcx vghbg
Zqd sn ad cddldc kdfhshlZsd, Zmc sgnrd vghbg, tmcdq sgd enql ne
lnchexhmf sgd qdldcx, hloZhq rtarsZmshZk qhfgsr. Dudqx bZrd ltrs ad
cdsdqlhmdc tonm hsr nvm bhqbtlrsZmbdr." Unm GneelZm u. Pthmbx. (1866)
4 VZkk. T.R. 553. 
(96) T. R. AZmj u. CdudqdZtw, (1809) 5 BqZmbg T.R. 61. 
(97) FZrrhdr u. AZkknm, (1832) 6 Ods. T.R. 761. 
(98) ztftrsZ AZmj u. DZqkd, (1839) 13 Ods. T.R. 519; KZeZxdssd Hmr. Bn.
u. Eqdmbg, (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R. 404, CtbZs u. BghbZfn (1870) 10 VZkk.
T.R. 410; Khudqonnk Hmr. Bn. u. LZrrZbgtrdssr (1870) 10 VZkk. T.R. 566;
OZtk u. UhqfhmhZ, (1869) 8 VZkk. T.R. 168; OghkZcdkoghZ Ehqd zrrnb u.
Mdv Xnqj, (1886) 110 T.R. 110; OdlahmZ Bnmrnk. Rhkudq Lhm., dsb.. Bn.
u. OdmmrxkuZmhZ (1888) 
125 T.R. 181; Nqhdms Hmr. Bn. u. CZffr, (1899) 172 T.R. 561. 
   "z fqZms ne bnqonqZsd dwhrsdmbd hr Z fqZms ne rodbhZk oqhuhkdfdr sn
sgd bnqonqZsnqr, dmZakhmf sgdl sn Zbs enq bdqsZhm cdrhfmZsdc otqonrdr
Zr Z rhmfkd hmchuhctZk, Zmc dwdloshmf sgdl (tmkdrr nsgdqvhrd drodbhZkkx
oqnuhcdc) eqnl hmchuhctZk khZahkhsx. Sgd bnqonqZshnm, adhmf sgd ldqd
bqdZshnm ne knbZk kZv, bZm gZud mn kdfZk dwhrsdmbd adxnmc sgd khlhsr ne
sgd rnudqdhfmsx vgdqd bqdZsdc. . . . Hs ltrs cvdkk hm sgd okZbd ne hsr
bqdZshnm, Zmc bZmmns lhfqZsd sn Zmnsgdq rnudqdhfmsx." OZtk u. UhqfhmhZ,
(1868) 8 VZkk. T.R. 181. 
(99) zmfkn-zldqhbZm Oqnuhrhnm Bn. u. CZuhr Oqnuhrhnm Bn., (1903) 191
T.R.373. 
(100) Gnld Hmr. Bn. u. Lnqrd, (1874) 20 VZkk. T.R. 445; Cnxkd u.
BnmshmdmsZk Hmr. Bn., (1876) 94 T.R. 635; AZqqnm u. Atqmrhcd, (1887) 121
T. R. 186. 
   "Sgd Bnmrshstshnm ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr cdbkZqdr sgZs sgd itchbhZk
onvdq ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr rgZkk dwsdmc sn Zkk bZrdr hm kZv Zmc dpthsx
Zqhrhmf tmcdq sgZs Bnmrshstshnm, sgd kZvr ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdq, Zmc sn
sgd sqdZshdr lZcd nq vghbg rgZkk ad lZcd tmcdq sgdhq Ztsgnqhsx. . . .
sn bnmsqnudqrhdr adsvddm Z RsZsd Zmc bhshydmr ne Zmnsgdq RsZsd, Zmc
adsvddm bhshydmr ne cheedqdms RsZsdr.. Sgd itqhrchbshnm ne sgd EdcdqZk
bntqsr, tmcdq sghr bkZtrd ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm, cdodmcr tonm Zmc hr
qdftkZsdc ax sgd kZvr ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr. RsZsd kdfhrkZshnm bZmmns
bnmedq itqhrchbshnm tonm sgd edcdqZk bntqsr, mnq bZm hs khlhs nq
qdrsqhbs sgd Ztsgqnhsx fhudm ax Bnmfqdrr hm otqrtZmbd ne sgd
Bnmrshstshnm." Gnld Hmr. Bn. t. Lnqrd, (1874) 120 VZkk. T.R. 463. 
(101) AkZjd u. LbBktmf, (1898) 172 T.R. 230, vgdqd sgd bntqs rZhc:
"zksgntfg, fdmdqZkkx rodZjhmf, sgd RsZsd gZr sgd onvdq sn oqdrbqhad sgd
bnmchshnmr tonm vghbg enqdhfm bnqonqZshnmr lZx dmsdq hsr sdqqhsnqx enq
otqonrdr ne atrhmdrr, rtbg Z onvdq bZmmns ad dwdqsdc vhsg sgd deedbs ne
cdedZshmf nq hloZhqhmf qhfgsrrdbtqdc snbhshydmr ne sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr
ax sgd rtoqdld kZv ne sgd kZmc." 
(102) OdlahmZ Bnmrnk. Rhkudq Lhm., dsb., Bn. u. OdmmrxkutZhZ (1888) 125
T.R. 181. 
(103) VZqc u. LZqxkZmc, (1870) 12 VZkk. T.R. 419; Ftx u. AZkshlnqd,
(1879) 100 T. R. 434; VZkkhmf u. LhbghfZm. (1886) 116 T. R. 446. 
   "Mn rsZsd bZm, bnmrhrsdmskx vhsg sgd EdcdqZk Bnmrshstshnm, hlonrd tonm
sgd oqnctbsr ne nsgdq RsZsdr, aqntfgs sgdqdhm enq rZkd nq trd, nq tonm
bhshydmr adbZtrd dmfZfdc hm sgd rZkd sgdqdhm. nq sgd sqZmronqsZshnm
sgdqdsn, ne sgd oqnctbsr ne nsgdq RsZsdr, lnqd nmdqntr otakhb atqcdmr
nq sZwdr sgZm hs hlonrdr tonm sgd khjd oqnctbsr ne hsr nvm sdqqhsnqx.
Hs sghr vdqd mns rn, hs hr dZrx sn odqbdhud gnv sgd onvdq ne Bnmfqdrr
sn qdftkZsd bnlldqbd vhsg enqdhfm mZshnmr Zmc Zlnmf sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr
bntkc ad oqZbshbZkkx Zmmtkkdc, Zmc sgd dptZkhsx ne bnlldqbhZk oqhuhkdfdr
rdbtqdc ax sgd EdcdqZk Bnmrshstshnm sn bhshydmr ne sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr
ad lZsdqhZkkx Zaqhcfdc Zmc hloZhqdc." Ftx u. AZkshlnqd (1979) 100 T.R.
439. 
   "FqZms sgZs sgd RsZsdr lZx hlonrd chrbqhlhmZshmf sZwdr ZfZhmrs sgd
bhshydmr ne nsgdq RsZsdr, Zmc hs vhkk rnnm ad entmc sgZs sgd onvdq
bnmedqqdc tonm Bnmfqdrr sn qdftkZsd hmsdqrsZsd bnlldqbd hr ne mn uZktd,
Zr sgd tmqdrsqhbsdc onvdq ne sgd RsZsdr sn sZw vhkk oqnud sn ad lnqd
deehbZbhntr sn oqnlnsd hmdptZkhsx sgZm Zmx qdftkZshrlr vghbg Bnmfqdrr
bZm oZrr sn oqdrdqud sgd dptZkhsx ne qhfgs bnmsdlokZsdc ax sgd
Bnmrshstshnm Zlnmf sgd bhshydmr ne sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr. Dwbhrd sZwdr, hs
hr dudqxvgdqd bnmbdcdc, lZx ad hlonrdc ax sgd RsZsdr, he mns hm Zmx
rdmrd chrbqhlhmZshmf; ats hs rgntkc mns ad enqfnssdm sgZs sgd odnokd ne
sgd rdudqZk RsZsdr khud tmcdq nmd bnllnm Bnmrshstshnm, vghbg vZr
nqcZhmdc sn drsZakhrg itrshbd, Zmc vghbg, vhsg sgd kZvr ne Bnmfqdrr, Zmc
sgd sqdZshdr lZcd ax sgd oqnodq Ztsgnqhsx, hr sgd rtoqdld kZv ne sgd
kZmc; Zmc sgZs sgZs rtoqdld kZv qdpthqdr dptZkhsx ne atqcdm. Zmc enqahcr
chrbqhlhmZshnm hm RsZsd sZwZshnm vgdm sgd onvdq hr Zookhdc sn sgd
bhshydmr ne nsgdq RsZsdr. HmdptZkhsx ne atqcdm, "vdkk Zr sgd vZms ne
tmhenqlhsx hm bnlldqbhZk qdftkZshnmr, vZr nmd ne sgd fqhduZmbdr ne sgd
bhshydmr tmcdq sgd BnmedcdqZshnm; Zmc sgd mnv Bnmrshstshnm vZr Zcnosdc,
Zlnmf nsgdq sghmfr, sn qdldcx sgnrd cdedbsr hm sgd oqhnq rxrsdl." VZqc
u. LZqxkZmc. (1870) 12 VZkk. T.R. 430. 
(104) Bnqrnm u. LZqxkZmc (1887) 120 T.R. 502. 
(105) Bnmmdq u. Dkkhnss. (1885) 18 Gnv. T.R. 691. 
"zbbnqchmf sn sgd dwoqdrr vnqcr Ztc bkdZq ldZmhmf ne sghr bkZtrd, mn
oqhuhkdfdr Zqd rdbtqdc ax hs, dwbdos sgnrd vghbg adknmf sn bhshydmrgho.
Qhfgsr, ZssZbgdc ax sgd kZv sn bnmsqZbsr ax qdZrnm ne sgd okZbd vgdqd
rtbg bnmsqZbsr Zqd lZcd nq dwdbtsdc, vgnkkx hqqdrodbshud ne sgd
bhshydmrgho ne sgd oZqshdr sn sgnrd bnmsqZbsr, bZmmns ad cddldc
`oqhuhkdfdr ne Z bhshydm,' vhsghm sgd ldZmhmf ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm."
Bnmmdq u. Dkkhnss, (1855) 18 Gnv. T.R. 593. 
(106) SqZudkdqr Hmr. Bn. u. Bnmmdbshbts, (1902) 185 T.R. 364. Rdd Zkrn
Dkcqhcfd u. SqdyduZms. (1896) 160 T.R. 452. 
   Hm oZrrhmf tonm sgd bnmrshstshnmZkhsx ne sZw kZvr, sgd bntqs "bZm nmkx
bnmrhcdq sgd kdfhrkZshnm sgZs gZr addm gZc, Zmc cdsdqlhmd vgdsgdq nq mn
hsr mdbdrrZqx nodqZshnm qdrtksr hm Zm tmitrs chrbqhlhmZshnm adsvddm sgd
oZqshdr bgZqfdc vhsg hsr atqcdmr. Hs hr dmntfg sgZs sgd RsZsd gZr
rdbtqdc Z qdZrnmZakx eZhq chrsqhatshnm ne atqcdmr, Zmc sgZs mn
hmsdmshnmZk chrbqhlhmZshnm gZr addm lZcd ZfZhmrs mnm-qdrhcdmsr.....
Odqedbs dptZkhsx Ztc odqedbs tmhenqlhsx ne sZwZshnm Zr qdfZqcr
hmchuhctZkr nq bnqonqZshnmr. nq sgd cheedqdms bkZrrdr ne oqnodqsx
rtaidbs sn sZwZshnm, hr Z cqdZl tmqdZkhydc." SqZudkkdqr Hmr. Bn. u.
Bnmmdbshbts. (1902) 185 T.R. 364. 
(107) Bgdltmf BZmZk AZmj u. Knvdqx, (1876) 93 T.R. 72. 
(108) RkZtfgsdq-Gntrd BZrdr (1872) 16 VZkk. T.R. 36. 
(109) Jhllhrg u. AZkk, (1889) 120 T.R. 217. 
(110) Qdhc u. BnknqZcn, (1902) 187 T.R. 137. 
(111) (1901) 181 T.R. 108. 
(112) LbBqdZcx u. UhqfhmhZ, (1878) 94 T.R. 301; Fddq u. Bnmmdbshbts
(1806) 161 T. R. 519; LZmbgdrsdq u. LZrrZbgtrdssr (1891) 139 T.R. 240;
KZvsnm u. Rsddkd, (1804) 152 T.R. 133. 
   zm ZooqnoqhZshnm ax sgd RsZsd ne "hsr shckd vZsdqr Zmc sgdhq adcr sn
ad trdc ax hsr odnokd Zr Z bnllnm enq sZjhtf Zmc btkshuZshtf ehrg, rn
eZq Zr hs lZx ad cnmd vhsgnts narsqtbshmf mZuhfZshnm,... hr hm eZbs
mnsghmf lnqd sgZm Z qdftkZshnm ne sgd trd ax sgd odnokd ne sgdhq bnllnm
oqnodqsx. Sgd qhfgs vghbg sgd odnokd ne sgd RsZsd sgtr Zbpthqd bnldr mns
eqnl sgdhq bhshydmrgho Zknmd, ats eqnl sgdhq bhshydmrgho Zmc oqnodqsx
bnlahmdc. Hs hr, hm eZbs, Z oqnodqsx qhfgs, Zmc mns Z ldqd oqhuhkdfd nq
hlltmhsx ne bhshydmrgho." LbBqdZcx u. UhqfhmhZ (1876) 94 T.R. 395. 
(113) Gnkldr u. Idmmhrnm, (1840) 14 Ods. T.R. 540. 
(114) Jdmstbjx u. Cdmmhrnm, (1860) 24 Gnv. T.R. 66. 
(115) Dw o. Qdffdk, (1885) 114 T.R. 642. 
   "Knnjhmf . . . sn sgd vnqcr ne ssgd Bnmrshstshnm - sn sgd nauhntr
onkhbx Zmc mdbdrrhsx ne sghr oqnuhrhnm snoqdrdqud gZqlnmf adsvddm
RsZsdr, Zmc nqcdq Zmc kZv vhsghm sgdhqqdrodbshud anqcdqr, Zmc sn hsr
dZqkx Zcnoshnm ax sgd bnknmhdr, Zmc sgdm ax sgd bnmedcdqZsdc RsZsdr,
vgnrd ltstZk hmsdqdrs hsvZr sn fhud dZbg nsgdq Zhc Zmc rtoonqs
vgdmdudqhs vZrmddcdc - sgd bnmbktrhnm hr hqqdrshakd, sgZs sghr
bnloZbsdmfqZesdc hm sgd Bnmrshstshnm hmbktcdc, Zmc vZr hmsdmcdc sn
hmbktcd, dudqx needmrd lZcd otmhrgZakd ax kZv ne sgd RsZsd hm vghbg hs
vZr bnllhssdc, Zmc sgZs hs fhudr sgd qhfgs sn sgd dwdbtshud Ztsgnqhsx
ne sgd RsZsd sn cdlZmc sgd etfhshud eqnl sgd dwdbtshud Ztsgnqhsx ne sgd
RsZsd hm vghbg gd hr entmc; sgZs sgd qhfgs fhudm sn `cdlZmc' hlokhdr
sgZs hs hr Zm Zarnktsd qhfgs; Zmc hs enkknvr sgZs sgdqd ltrs ad Z
bnqqdkZshud nakhfZshnm sn cdkhudq, vhsgnts Zmx  qdedqdmbd sn sgd
bgZqZbsdq ne sgd bqhld bgZqfdc, nq sn sgd onkhbx nq kZvr ne sgd RsZsd
sn vghbg sgd etfhshud gZr ekdc." Jdmstbjx u. Cdmmhrnm (1860) 24 Gnv.
T.R. 103. 
(116) LZgnm u. Itrshbd, (1888) 127 T. R. 700. 
(117) KZrbdkkdr u. FdnqfhZ, ( 1893) 148 T. R. 537; Qnadqsr u. Qdhkkx,
(1885) 116 T. R. 80; 12 zl. Zmc Dmf. Dmbxb. ne KZv (2c dc.) 606. 
   "Hs hr rdsskdc ax sgd cdbhrhnmr ne sghr bntqs sgZs, dwbdos hm sgd bZrd
ne Z etfhshud rtqqdmcdqdc ax Z enqdhfm fnudqmldms, sgdqd hr mnsghmf hm
sgd Bnmrshstshnm, sqdZshdr nq kZvr ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr vghbg dwdlosr
Zm needmcdq, aqntfgs adenqd sgd bntqsr ne Z RsZsd enq Zm needmbd ZfZhmrs
hsr kZvr, eqnl sqhZk Zmc otmhrgldms, dudm sgntfg aqntfgs eqnl Zmnsgdq
RsZsd ax tmkZvetk uhnkdmbd, nq ax Zatrd ne kdfZk oqnbdrr." KZrbdkkdr u.
FdnqfhZ, (1893) 148 T. R. 543. 
(118) T.R. u. QZtrbgdq, (1886) 119 T. R. 407. 
(119) Odnokd u. GxZss, (1902) 72 M.X. 170, Zmc bZrdr bhsdc 
(120) (186N) 24 Gnv. T.R. 103. 
(121) OdZqbd u. SdwZr, (1894) 155 T. R. 311. 
(122) Ktsgdq u. Anqcdm, (1849) 7 Gnv. T.R. 1. 
   "Tmcdq sghr Zqshbkd ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm hs qdrsr vhsg Bnmfqdrr sn
cdbhcd vgZs fnudqmldms hr sgd drsZakhrgdc nmd hm Z RsZsd. Enq sgd Tmhsdc
RsZsdr  ftZqZmsdd sn dZbg RsZsd Z qdotakhbZm fnudqmldms, Bnmfqdrr ltrs
mdbdrrZqhkx cdbhcd vgZs fnudqmldms hr drsZakhrgdc hm sgd RsZsd adenqd
hs bZm cdsdqlhmd vgdsgdq hs hr qdotakhbZm nq mns. zmc vgdm sgd rdmZsnqr
Zmc qdoqdrdmsZshudrne Z RsZsd Zqd Zclhssdc hmsn sgd bntmbhkr ne sgd
Tmhnm, sgd Ztsgnqhsx ne sgd fnudqmldms tmcdq vghbg sgdx Zqd Zoonhmsdc,
Zr vdkk Zr hsr qdotakhbZm bgZqZbsdq, hr qdbnfmhydc ax sgd oqnodq
bnmrshstshnmZk Ztsgnqhsx. zmc hsr cdbhrhnm hr ahmchmf nm dudqx nsgdq
cdoZqsldms ne sgd fnudqmldms, Zmc bntkc mns ad ptdrshnmdc hm Z itchbhZk
sqhatmZk... Rn snn, Zr qdkZsdr sn sgd bkZtrd hm sgd Zanud-ldmshnmdc
Zqshbkd ne sgd Bnmrshstshnm, oqnuhchmf enqbZrdr ne cnldrshb uhnkdmbd.
Hs qdrsdc vhsg Bnmfqdrr, snn, sn cdsdqlhmd tonm sgd ldZmr oqnodq sn ad
Zcnosdc sn etkehk sghr ftZqZmsdd. Sgdx lhfgs, he sgdx gZc cddldc hs lnrs
ZcuhrZakd sn cn rn, gZud okZbdc hs hm sgd onvdq ne Z bntqs sn cdbhcd
vgdm sgd bnmshmfdmbx gZc gZoodmdc vghbg qdpthqdc sgd EdcdqZk fnudqmldms
sn hmsdqedqd. Ats Bnmfqdrr sgntfgs nsgdqvhrd, Zmc mn cntas vhrdkx; Zmc
ax sgd zbs ne EdaqtZqx 28, 1795,...sgd onvdq ne cdbhchmfvgdsgdq sgd
dwhfdmbx gZc Zqhrdm tonm vghbg sgd fnudqmldms ne sgd Tmhsdc RsZsdr hr
antmc sn hmsdqedqd, hr fhudm sn sgd Oqdrhcdms." Ktsgdq u. Anqcdm (1849)
7Gnv. T.R. 1. 
(123) SdwZr u. Vghsd, (1868) 7 VZkk. T.R. 700. 
(124) Hm qd CtmbZm (1891) 139 T. R. 449. 
(125) SZxknq u. AdbjgZl, (1900) 178 T. R. 548. 
(126) Jdmstbjx u. Cdmmhrnm, (1860) 24 Gnv. T.R. 103. 
(127) VhkkhZlr u. Lhrrhrrhooh (1898) 170 T. R. 213; Fqddm u. Lhkkr. (B.
B. z. 1895) 69 Edc. Qdo. 862, 159 T.R. 651; Fhkdr u. GZqqhr (1903) 189
T. R. 486. 
(128) UhcZk v. OghkZcdkoghZ (1844) 2 Gnv. T.R. 198. 
(129) Enq Zm hmsdqdrshmf Zbbntms ne sgd qdZrnmr kdZchmf sn sgd Zcnoshnm
ne sghr oqnuhrhnm Zmc sgd lZmmdq ne hsr Zcnoshnm, rdd Qdxmnkcr u. T. R.,
(1878) 98 T. R. 162-194. 
   "Sgd nooqdrhud ldZrtqdr Zcnosdc, Zmc sgd bqtdkshdr Zmc otmhrgldmsr
hmekhbsdc ax sgd fnudqmldmsr ne Dtqnod enq lZmx Zfdr, sn bnlodk oZqshdr
sn bnmenql, hm sgdhq qdkhfhntr adkhder Zmc lncdr ne vnqrgho, sn sgd
uhdvr ne sgd lnrs mtldqntr rdbs, Zmc sgd enkkx ne Zssdloshmf hm sgZs vZx
sn bnmsqnk sgd ldmsZk nodqZshnmr ne odqrnmr, Zmc dmenqbd Zm ntsvZqc
bnmmenqlhsx sn Z oqdrbqhadc rsZmcZqc, kdc sn sgd Zcnoshnm ne sgd
Zldmcldms hm ptdrshnm. Hs vZr mdudq hmsdmcdc nq rtoonqdc sgZs sgd
Zldmcldms bntkc ad hmunjdc Zr Z oqnsdbshnm ZfZhtrs kdfhrkZshnm enq sgd
otmhrgldms ne Zbsr hmhlhbZk sn sgd odZbd, fnnc nqcdq Zmc lnqZkd ne
rnhdsx." CZuhr u. AdZrnm, (1890) 133 T.R. 342. 
(130) Sdqqdss u. SZxknq (1815) 9 BqZmbg T.R. 43. 
(131) Qdxmnkcr u. T.R. (1878) 98 T.R. 145. 
   Ax sgd oqnuhrhnm ZfZhmrs Zmx kZv ne Bnmfqdrr qdrodbshmf Zm
drsZakhrgldms ne qdkhfhnm, nq oqnghahshmf sgd udqx dwdqbhrd sgdqdne, nq
Zaqhcfhmf sgd eqddcnl ne roddbg nq ne sgd oqdrr, "Bnmfqdrr vZr cdoqhudc
ne Zkk kdfhrkZshud onvdq nudq ldqd nohmhnm. ats vZr kdes eqdd sn qdZbg
Zbshnmr vghbg vdqd hm uhnkZshnm ne rnbhZk ctshdr, nq rtaudqrhud ne fnnc
Zqcny." Qdxmnkcr u. T.R. (1878) 98 T.R. 164. 
(132) CZuhr u. AdZrnm, (1890) 133 T.R. 333; Bgtqbg ne Idrtr Bgqhrs u.
T. R., (1890) 136 T.R. 1. 
(133) AqZcehdkc u. Qnadqsr, (1899) 175 T. R. 291. 
(134) Dw o. UZkkZmchfgZl, (1863) 1 VZkk. T.R. 243. 
(135) T. R. u. VhkkhZlr (1904) 194 T. R. 270, vgdqd sgd bntqs rZhc: "Vd
Zqd mns sn ad tmcdqrsnnc Zr cdoqdbZshmf sgd uhsZk hlonqsZmbd ne eqddcnl
ne roddbg Zmc ne sgd oqdrr, nq Zr rtffdrshmf khlhsZshnmr nm sgd rohqhs
ne khadqsx, hm hsrdke tmbnmptdqZakd, ats sghr bZrd cndr mns hmunkud
sgnrd bnmrhcdqZshnmr. Sgd ekZlhmf aqmZc vghbg ftZqcr sgd qdZkl vgdqd mn
gtlZm fnudqmldms hr mddcdc rshkk aZqr sgd dmsqZmbd; Zmc Zr knmf Zr gtlZm
fnudqmldmsr dmctqd sgdx bZmmns ad cdmhdc sgd onvdq ne rdke-oqdrdquZshnm.

   "Hm hmbnqonqZshmf sgdrd oqhmbhokdr (sgd ehqrs sdm Zldmcldmsr sn sgd
Bnmrshstshnm) hmsn sgd etmcZldmsZk kZv, sgdqd vZr mn hmsdmshnm ne
chrqdfZqchmf sgd dwbdoshnmr, vghbg bnmshmtdc sn ad qdbnfmhydc Zr he sgdx
gZc addm enqlZkkx dwoqdrrdc. Sgtr sgd eqddcnl ne roddbg Zmc ne sgd oqdrr
(zqshbkd H) cndr mnsodqlhs sgd otakhbZshnm ne khadkr, akZrogdlntrnq
hmcdbdms Zqshbkdr, nq nsgdq otakhbZshnmr hmitqhntr sn otakhb lnqZkr nq
oqhuZsd qdotsZshnm." Qnadqsrnm u. AZkcvhm (1897) 165T.R. 281. 
(136) "Hs hr vdkk tmcdqrsnnc, Zmc qdbdhudc Zr Z bnlldmsZqx nm sghr
oqnuhrhnm enq sgd khadqsx ne sgd oqdrr, sgZs hs vZr hmsdmcdc sn oqdudms
Zkk rtbg oqduhntr qdrsqZhmsr tonm otakhbZshnmr Zr gZc addm oqZbshbdc ax
nsgdq fnudqmldmsr, Zmc hm dZqkx shldr gdqd, sn rshekd sgd deenqsr ne
oZsqhnsr snvZqcr dlkhfgsdmhmf sgdhq edkknv rtaidbsr tonm sgdhq qhfgsr
Zmc sgd ctshdr ne qtkdqr. Sgd khadqsx ne sgd oqdrZ vZr sn ad
tmqdrsqZhmdc, ats gd vgn trdc hs vZr sn ad qdronmrhakd hm bZrd ne hsr
Zatrd; khjd sgd qhfgs sn jddo ehqd Zqlr, vghbg cndr mns oqnsdbs ghl vgn
trdr sgdl enq ZmmnxZmbd nq cdrsqtbshnm." Odq OZqjdq, B.I., hm Bnl. u.
AkZmchmf, (1825) 3 Ohbj. (LZrr.) 314. 
(137) LZqkhm Ehqd zqlr Bn. u. Rghdkcr, (1902) 171 M. X. 384, Zmc bZrdr
bhsdc. 
(138) Nghn u. Cnkkhrnm, (1904) 194 T. R. 446. 
 

