                             rDALPxN ER. 
                                    
      KB PDx NECDPO, LNEREHxCxO, AJu EIIQJEPxxO KB PDx rEPEVxJ. 
 
   Pea ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ fjjskfqfap klv akglyaZ Xy Yfqfzakp lb qea
OqWqap Yljmlpfkd qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, veaqeao Wp Yfqfzakp lb qea OqWqap
lo lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, lofdfkWqaZ fk ofdeqp mlppappaZ lo YiWfjaZ Xy
qea fkeWXfqWkqp lb qea qefoqaak AjaofYWk Ylilkfap, vefia qeay vaoa
ZamakZakYfap lb CoaWq cofqWfk. Pea pqosddia lb qea AjaofYWk Ylilkfpqp
blo fkZamakZakYa vWp XWpaZ smlk qea YiWfj qeWq qeay vaoa ZakfaZ, Xy qea
mWoakq dltaokjakq, ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ fjjskfqfap vefYe vaoa qeafo
Yljjlk eaofqWda Wp cofqfpe boaajak, lo vefYe eWZ bolj qfja ql qfja Xaak
doWkqaZ pmaYfbfYWiiy ql qea AjaofYWk Ylilkfap. 
   Jl vofqqak YeWoq fk awfpqakYa, qeak lo klv, eWp atao WqqajmqaZ ql
aksjaoWqa, YiWofby, WkZ Zabfka fk lka psYYfkYq awmoappflk, qea ofdeqp,
ifXaoqfap, WkZ boWkYefpap mlppappaZ Xy xkdifpe psXgaYqp, klo fp fq qea
msomlpa lb qefp tlisja ql Wqqajmq ql Zl qeWq. Eq fp psbbfYfakq ql pWy
qeWq qea ifXaoqfap WkZ ofdeq lb paib-dltaokjakq lb qea cofqfpe malmia,
Xadfkkfkd vfqe qea ZaYiWoWqflkp lb IWdkW reWoqW, eWta Xaak WpYaoqWfkaZ
WkZ ZaYiWoaZ bolj qfja ql qfja, Zsofkd pfw Yakqsofap lb YlkbifYq Xaqvaak
qea malmia lb qea cofqfpe oaWij WkZ qeafo psYYappfta pltaoafdkp, skqfi
qeay Woa klv vaii apqWXifpeaZ WkZ nsfqa qelolsdeiy skZaopqllZ. 
   JlqvfqepqWkZfkd qea cofqfpe malmia eWta oaqWfkaZ fk qeafo dltaokjakq
qea bloj lb W ifjfqaZ jlksoYey, qeay eWta apqWXifpeaZ blo qeajpaitap Wp
WdWfkpq qeafo YlkpqfqsqflkWi jlkWoYe, W jaWpsoa lb mlmsiWo pltaoafdkqy
WkZ maoplkWi ifXaoqy Wp doaWq Wp qeWq mlppappaZ Xy Wky lqeao malmia fk
qea vloiZ. Kso XlWpq fp qeWq lsop fp W boaa oamsXifY; qeWq fq fp
ZlsXqbsi veaqeao, Wiqelsde va eWta W moapfZakq fkpqaWZ lb W hfkd, WkZ
W psmoaja Ylsoq vfqe aaoqsfk mlvao ql Ylkqoli Xlqe awaYsqfta WkZ
iadfpiWqfta WYqflk, qea Gfkd lb xkdiWkZ, lk qea velia, mlppappap Wp jsYe
fkZamakZakq Wsqelofqy Wp qea LoapfZakq lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. 
   Aiqelsde qea pqosddia lb qea AjaofYWk Ylilkfpqp vWp XWpaZ smlk qea
YiWfj qeWq qea mWoakq dltaokjakq ZakfaZ qea fkeWXfqWkqp lb qea Ylilkfap
qea dsWoWkqaaZ ofdeqp lb cofqfpe Yfqfzakp, qea AjaofYWk Ylilkfpqp, atak
skZao cofqfpe Zljfkflk, vaoa WYYloZaoaZ WkZ WYqsWiiy akglyaZ jWky
ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ boWkYefpap, maYsifWo ql qeajpaitap, klq akglyaZ
Xy xkdifpejak Wq elja, lo atak lb cofqfpe lofdfk; plja lb vefYe eWta
klq, ql qefp ZWy, Xaak WZlmqaZ fk qeafo akqfoaqy fk xkdiWkZ. 
 
   OlsoYa lb AjaofYWk LiWk lb Cltaokjakq WkZ Nfdeqp lb rfqfzakpefm. 
 
   IWky lb qea ZaYiWoWqflkp lb mlmsiWo ofdeqp paq bloqe fk qea AjaofYWk
uaYiWoWqflk lb EkZamakZakWYa vaoa lb ofdeqp vefYe vaoa klq lb xkdifpe
lofdfk.  Pea AjaofYWk Ylilkfpqp eWZ XaYlja bWjfifWo vfqe qea ofdeqp lb
Yfqfzakpefm mlppappaZ fk lqeao Ylskqofap, Xlqe bolj qea bWYq qeWq plja
lb qaj oapfZaZ fk DliiWkZ blo W qfja, Xabloa qeay YWja ql AjaofYW, WkZ
bolj qea bsoqeao bWYq qeWq qea Jav Uloh Ylilky vWp appakqfWiiy usqYe fk
fqp lofdfkWi paqqiajakq WkZ dltaokjakq. Eq fp miWfk ql paa, Xy
YljmWofplk vfqe lqeao efpqlofY ZlYsjajqp, qeWq qea uaYiWoWqflk lb
EkZamakZakYa lb 1776 vWp jlZaiaZ, ql W iWoda awqakq, klq smlk xkdifpe
moaYaZakqp, Xsq smlk qea vofqqak Ylkpqfqsqflk lb qea JaqeaoiWkZp
NamsXifY, YWiiaZ Pea Qkflk lb QqoaYeq, lb 1579. 
   Pea jWkfbapql fppsaZ Xy qea oaXaip Wq qea qfja lb cWYlk'p NaXaiiflk
fk RfodfkfW fk 1676 YlkqWfkp jsYe bolj qea pWja plsoYa. Pea Qkflk lb
QqoaYeq WkZ cWYlk'p NaXaiiflk WkqaZWqaZ, lka Xy lka eskZoaZ yaWop WkZ
qea lqeao Xy qeoaa yaWop, qea xwYispflk AYq lb 1679, Xy vefYe FWjap ][E
lb xkdiWkZ vWp ZamlpaZ, WkZ vefYe, Xy plja vofqaop, eWp Xaak oabaooaZ
ql Wp qea plsoYa bolj vefYe qea YiWfj paq bloqe fk qea uaYiWoWqflk lb
EkZamakZakYa vaoa ZaoftaZ. 
   Jlo ZfZ qea AjaofYWk fZaWp lb W vofqqak Ylkqfqfqsqflk WkZ W psmoaja
Ylsoq ajWkWqa Wiqldaqeao bolj xkdifpejak. Peay vaoa qea oapsiqp lb qea
Yl-lmaoWqfta iWXlop lb LsofqWkp WkZ rWtWifaop, usqYejak, Dsdsaklqp, WkZ
OYlqYe-Eofpejak, WppajXiaZ fk Ylktakqflk fk AjaofYW, vlohfkd blo W
Yljjlk akZ, smlk jlZaip ZaoftaZ bolj jWky Ylskqofap vfqe velpa
dltaokjakqp qeay vaoa bWjfifWo. Blo awWjmia, qea ZajWkZ blo qea
pamWoWqflk lb resoYe WkZ OqWqa, vefYe fp W iaWZfkd qakaq lb AjaofYWk
dltaokjakq, fp klq lb cofqfpe lofdfk. RfodfkfW vWp bloajlpq fk qefp
Ylkqakqflk. Oea WXlifpeaZ qfqeap WkZ blobafqaZ diaXa iWkZp. Pea YeWkda
vWp Xolsdeq WXlsq qeolsde qea fkbisakYa lb LWqofYh Dakoy, W OYlqYe
Zfppakqao; WkZ lb PeljWp Fabbaoplk, W jWk lb Saipe lofdfk, vfqe tfavp
ZaoftaZ bolj W pqsZy lb usqYe moaYaZakqp. 
   Ol, qll, qea WXlifqflk lb moftfiadaZ YiWppap vWp ZfpqfkYqiy
Wkqf-xkdifpe.  
   Pea AjaofYWk pypqaj lb iWkZ qaksoap, qea WXlifdWqflk lb akqWfip WkZ
mofjldakfqsoap, WkZ lso jaqelZp lb qoWkpbao lb oaWi apqWqa, Woa Wii
Wkqf-xkdifpe fk qeafo lofdfk. xkqWfip WkZ mofjldakfqsoap vaoa YeaofpeaZ
fkpqfqsqflkp lb xkdiWkZ. Kso pypqaj lb qoWkpbaoofkd oaWi apqWqa Xy qea
oadfpqoWqflk lb ZaaZp YWja bolj DliiWkZ, WkZ eWp klq, atak ql qea
moapakq ZWy, Xaak bsiiy WZlmqaZ fk xkdiWkZ. Kso iWvp dltaokfkd qea
qoWkpbao lb maoplkWi molmaoqy WkZ lso velia pypqaj lb jaoYWkqfia iWv Woa
WZWmqWqflkp lb rlkqfkakqWi WkZ NljWk jaqelZp, jlZfbfaZ pl Wp ql jWha
qeaj WmmifYafXia ql lso jlZaok YlkZfqflkp. Sa lva klqefkd ql xkdiWkZ blo
lso pypqaj lb aiaYqflkp lo blo lso msXifY molpaYsqlop. Pea fZaW lb W
msXifY molpaYsqlo lo YljjlkvaWiqe'p Wqqlokay YWja bolj DliiWkZ. 
   Kso pypqaj lb YeWofqWXia fkpqfqsqflkp, elpmfqWip, WkZ mofplkp fp klq
jlZaiaZ smlk xkdifpe moaYaZakqp. Pea YeWofqWXia fkpqfqsqflkp, elpmfqWip,
WkZ mofplkp lb qea Ylilkfap WkqaZWqaZ qelpa fk xkdiWkZ. Pea bfopq lb
qeapa apqWXifpeaZ fk qea AjaofYWk Ylilkfap vaoa YlmfaZ bolj usqYe
jlZaip, WkZ qea WZjfoWXia pypqaj klv awfpqfkd fk xkdiWsZ fp ZaoftaZ
iWodaiy bolj W pqsZy WkZ WZlmqflk lb qelpa vefYe vaoa bfopq apqWXifYXaZ
fk qea usqYe Ylilky lb Jav Uloh WkZ fk qea MsWhao Ylilky lb
LakkpyitWkfW. 
   Ol, qll, qea AjaofYWk Yfqfzak ZaoftaZ efp mofkYfmiap lb oaifdflsp
qliaoWqflk, klq bolj xkdiWkZ, Xsq bolj qea usqYe. Ap iWqa Wp 1663, veak
qea oamoapakqWqftap lb qea rolvk fk qea xkdifpe Ylilkfap vaoa, skZao
loZaop bolj xkdiWkZ, maopaYsqfkd MsWhaop WkZ AkWXWmqfpqp WkZ ZajWkZfkd
qeWq qeay qWha qea lWqe lb WiiadfWkYa WkZ Ylkblojfqy lo psbbao
mskfpejakq; veak LsofqWkp vaoa Zoftfkd Lfidofjp bolj IWppWYespaqqp fkql
NelZa EpiWkZ, WkZ RfodfkfWkp miWYfkd qea Gfkd'p XolWZ Woolv lk qea
elspap lb Zfppakqaop fk IWoyiWkZ, qea usqYe Ylilky lb Jav Uloh vWp
oaYaftfkd loZaop bolj AjpqaoZWj molYiWfjfkd qeWq qea YlkpYfakYa lb jak
lsdeq ql oajWfk boaa. Pea loZaop oaWZ: "Haq ataoy lka oajWfk boaa Wp
ilkd Wp ea fp jlZapq, jlZaoWqa, efp mlifqfYWi YlkZsYq fooamolWYeWXia,
WkZ Wp ilkd Wp ea Zlap klq lbbakZ lqeaop lo lmmlpa qea dltaokjakq"(1)
Pefp vWp qvakqy yaWop Xabloa Lakk YWja ql AjaofYW, WkZ, atak Wbqao ea
YWja, qea OYlqYe-Eofpe WkZ CaojWkp vaoa Zoftak bolj LakkpyitWkfW Xy
HldWk'p lmmoappfta WZjfkfpqoWqflk lb qea MsWhao iWvp, WkZ plsdeq Wpyisj
fk qea OeakWkZlWe tWiiay lb RfodfkfW. 
   Pea Lfidofjp fk NelZa EpiWkZ molpYofXaZ rWqelifYp WkZ ZamoftaZ qeaj
lb psbboWda, lk WYYlskq lb qeafo oaifdflk, bolj 1719 ql 1783. 
   Io. IWZfplk fp Wsqelofqy blo qea pqWqajakq qeWq qea awWjmia lb DliiWkZ
iaZ ql qea YlkpqfqsqflkWi moltfpflk bloXfZZfkd rlkdoapp bolj jWhfkd Wky
akWYqjakq "oapmaYqfkd Wk apqWXifpejakq lb oaifdflk" lo WXofZdfkd qea
boaaZlj lb qea moapp. 
   LaoeWmp qeaoa fp kl lqeao qefkd fk vefYe qea Yfqfzak lb qea QkfqaZ
OqWqap qWhap doaWqao mofZa qeWk fk lso pypqaj lb msXifY aZsYWqflk. Pea
moftfiada lb msXifY-pYelli aZsYWqflk blo efp YefiZoak fp mlppappaZ Xy
ataoy Yfqfzak lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap fk qea OqWqa lb vefYe ea fp W
Yfqfzak, kl jWqqao elv esjXia lo fdkloWkq ea jWy Xa lo elv ifjfqaZ efp
lvk ofdeqp. Pefp moftfiada, ifha qea lqeaop kWjaZ, fp ZfpqfkYqiy klq lb
xkdifpe lofdfk. Aq qea qfja lb qel ZamWoqsoa lb qea lofdfkWi Ylilkfpqp
bolj xkdiWkZ blo AjaofYW, kl pypqaj lb msXifY aZsYWqflk awfpqaZ fk CoaWq
cofqWfk. Jlka awfpqp qeaoa ql-ZWy, YljmWoWXia, fk qelolsdekapp, vfqe lso
lvk. Hlkd oapfZakYa fk DliiWkZ jWZa plja lb qea aWoifapq AjaofYsk
paqqiaop bWjfifWo vfqe qea Xakabfqp lb msXifY aZsYWqflk WkZ qea
WZtWkqWdap lb qea boaa pYelli pypqaj lb qea usqYe. csq W qelolsde pypqaj
lb boaa aZsYWqflk vWp fkpqWiiaZ fk qea usqYe alilky lb Jav Uloh bsiiy
qvakqy yaWop Xabloa Wky pYelli pypqaj vWp WZlmqaZ Xy qea Jav xkdiWkZ
Ylilky,. OmWopakapp lb mlmsiWqflk fk qea plsqeaok Ylilkfap oakZaoaZ boaa
pYellip Wijlpq fjmoWYqfYWXia qeaoa. csq qeay vaoa apqWXifpeaZ fk qea
mlmsilsp usqYe Yljjskfqfap WkZ Wjlkd qea OYlqYe-Eofpe lb qea OeakWkZlWe
tWiiay fk RfodfkfW, bolj qea qfja lb qea aWoifapq paqqiajakqp qeaoa. 
   JlqvfqepqWkZfkd qea plsqeaok Ylilkfap vaoa XWYhvWoZ, qea doaWqapq
fjmaqsp ql msXifY aZsYWqflk fk qea Jloqevapq Paoofqloy, Wbqao qea
Ylilkfap vaoa fkZamakZakq, YWja bolj qea plsqeaok paYqflk; blo veak
RfodfkfW YaZaZ eao ofdeqp fk qea Jloqevapq Paoofqloy ql qea BaZaoWi
dltaokjakq, pea ZajWkZaZ qeolsde Xao oamoapakqsqftap fk rlkdoapp,
NfYeWoZ Dakoy Haa WkZ LWsi rWoofkdqlk, qea YlkZfqflk fk qea Kefl
loZfkWkYa lb 1787, oansfofkd qeWq WiqaokWqa paYqflkp lb qea msXifY iWkZp
pelsiZ Xa ZaZfYWqaZ ql msomlpap lb msXifY aZsYsqflk.(2) 
   DWtfkd klv qoWYaZ qea fZaWp lb qea AjaofYWk Ylilkfpqp YlkYaokfkd miWkp
lb dltaokjakq WkZ ofdeqp lb Yfqfzakpefm ql qea plsoYap veakYa qeay
pmoskd, iaq sp kawq YlkpfZao elv bWo qeapa ofdeqp eWta Xaak fkYlomloWqaZ
fk qea dltaokjakqp vefYe qeay apqWXifpeaZ.(3) 
 
                  Nfdeqp lb rfqfzakp lb qea OqWqap. 
 
   Haq sp bfopq awWjfka qea ofdeqp lb Yfqfzakp Wp Yfqfzakp lb qea OqWqap;
blo qeapa YiaWoiy WkqaZWqa veWqatao ofdeqp qeay mlppapp Wp Yfqfzakp lb
qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, Xy W maoflZ ansWi ql qeWq vefYe aiWmpaZ Xaqvaak qea
WYhklviaZdjakq lb qea fkZamakZakYa lb qea qefoqaak fkZamakZakq Ylilkfap
Xy CoaWq cofqWfk, WkZ qea blojWqflk lb qea Qkflk Xy qea OqWqap
qeajpaitap. 
   Jl OqWqa fk qea Qkflk eWp atao plsdeq ql ajXlZy fk lka vofqqak YeWoq
W bsii awmoappflk lb Wii qea ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ fjjskfqfap lb fqp
Yfqfzakp. Jlo vfii qea Wqqajmq klv Xa jWZa. Kk qefp psXgaYq va peWii
Ylkqakq lsopaitap vfqe qea iWkdsWda lb Io. FspqfYa SWpefkdqlk,
Ylkpqosfkd OaYqflk 2 lb AoqfYia ER lb qea rlkqfqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ
OqWqap, vefYe moltfZap: "rfqfzakp lb aWYe OqWqa peWii Xa akqfqiaZ ql Wii
moftfiadap WkZ fjjskfqfap lb Yfqfzakp fk qea pataoWi OqWqap." Da pWfZ: 
   "Pea fknsfoy fp, SeWq Woa qea moftffiadap WkZ fjjskfqfap lb Yfqfzakp
fk qea pataoWi OqWqapq? Sa baai kl eapfqWqflk fk Ylkbfkfkd qeapa
awmoappflkp ql qelpa moftfiadap WkZ fjjskfqfap vefYe Woa fk qeafo kWqsoa
bskZWjakqWi, vefYe Xailkd lb ofdeq ql qea Yfqfzakp lb Wii boaa
dltaokjakqp, WkZ vefYe XWta Wq Wii qfjap Xaaj akglyaZ Xy qea Yfqfzakp
lb qea pataoWi OqWqap vefYe Yljmlpa qefp Qkflk, bolj qea qfja lb qeafo
XaYljfkd boaa, fkZamakZakq, WkZ pltaoafdk. SeWq qeapa bskZWjakqWi
mofkYfmiap Woa, fq vlsiZ maoeWmp Xa jloa qaZflsp qeWk ZfbbfYsiq ql
aksjaoWqa. Peay jWy, elvatao, Xa Wii YljmoaeakZaZ skZao qea bliilvfkd
dakaoWi XaWZp: molqaYqflk Xy qea dltaokjakq; qea akglyjakq lb ifba WkZ
ifXaoqy, vfqe qea ofdeq ql WYnsfoa WkZ mlppapp molmaoqy lb ataoy hfkZ,
WkZ ql msopsa WkZ lXqWfk eWmmfkapp WkZ pWbaqy; psXgaYq, kataoqeaiapp,
ql psYe oapqoWfkqp Wp qea dltaokjakq jWy gspqiy moapYofXa blo qea
dakaoWi dllZ lb qea velia."(4) 
   Io. FspqfYa Ifiiao, fk qea OiWsdeqao-Dlspa rWpap,(5) pWfZ, vfqe
oabaoakYa ql qefp lXpaotWqflk lb Io. FspqfYa SWpXfkdqlk: 
   "Pea ZapYofmqflk, veak qWhak ql fkYisZa lqeaop klq kWjaZ, Xsq vefYe
Woa lb qea pWja dakaoWi YeWoWYqao, ajXoWYap kaWoiy ataoy Yftfi ofdeq blo
qea apqWXifpejakq WkZ molqaYqflk lb vefae lodWkfzaZ dltaokjakq fp
fkpqfqsqaZ." 
   Sefia fq fp skZlsXqaZiy qosa qeWq qea Wqqajmq ql aksjaoWqa qeapa
ofdeqp lb Yfqfzakpefm vlsiZ Xa jloa qaZflsp qeWk ZfbbfYsiq, WkZ vefia
fq jWy Xa skkaYappWoy ql aksjaoWqa WkZ YiWppfby qeaj, apmaYfWiiy Wp qea
loZao lb qeafo aksjaoWqflk tWofap fk qea Zfbbaoakq OqWqap, fq paajp
molmao ql WZtaoq ql qea aWoifao awmoappflkp fk qea bfopq Xfii lb ofdeqp
boWjaZ Xy lka lb qea lofdfkWi OqWqap, ql WpYaoqWfk veWq lso
NatlisqflkWoy bloabWqeaop YlkYaftaZ ql Xa qea jlpq fjmloqWkq lb qea
ofdeqp blo vefYe qeay vaoa YlkqakZfkd. 
 
                        OqWqa cfiip lb Nfdeqp. 
 
   Pea cfii lb Nfdeqp lb RfodfkfW, ZoWbqaZ Xy Caloda IWplk, fp maoeWmp
qea jlpq bWjlsp lb Wii qeapa Xfiip lb ofdeqp, WkZ jWy Xa qWhak Wp Wk
awWjmia, Wp fq vWp jWZa qea jlZai lb jWky OqWqap WbqaovWoZp blojaZ. Eq
vWp skWkfjlspiy WZlmqaZ Xy qea RfodfkfW Ylktakqflk, Fska 12, 1776.(6)
Eq oaYfqap qea bliilvfkd Wp XWpfY WkZ blskZWqflkWi mofkYfmiap lb
dltaokjakq, WkZ ZaYiWoap qeWq qeay maoqWfk ql qea dllZ malmia lb qea
YljjlkvaWiqe WkZ qeafo mlpqaofqy: 
   1. PeWq Wii jak Woa Xy kWqsoa ansWiiy boaa, fkZamakZakq, WkZ eWta
YaoqWfk fkeaoakq ofdeqp, lb vefYe, veak qeay akqao fkql W pqWqa lb
plYfaqy, qeay YWkklq, Xy Wky YljmWYq, Zamofta lo Zftapq qeafo mlpqaofqy;
kWjaiy, qea akglyjakq lb ifba WkZ ifXaoqy, vfqe qea jaWkp lb WYnsfofkd
WkZ mlppappfkd molmaoqy, WkZ msopsfkd WkZ lXqWfkfkd eWmmfkapp WkZ
pWbaqy. 
   2. PeWq Wii mlvao fp tapqaZ fk, skZ Ylkpansakqiy ZaoftaZ bolj, qea
malmia; qeWq jWfofpqoWqap Woa qeafo qospqaap WkZ paotWkqp, WkZ Wq Wii 
qfjap WjakWXia. 
   3. PeWq dltaokjakq fp, lo lsdeq ql Xa, fsqfqsqaZ blo qea Yljjlk
Xakabfq, molqaYqflk, WkZ paYsofqy lb qea malmia, kWqflk, lo Yljjskfqy;
lb Wii qea tWoflsp blojp WkZ jlZap lb dltaokjakq, qeWq fp XaWq vefYe fp
YWmWXia lb molZsYfkd qea doaWqapq Zadoaa lb eWmmfkapp WkZ pWbaqy, WkZ
fp jlpq abbaYqsWiiy paYsoaZ WdWfkpq qea, ZWkdao lb jWiWZjfkfpqoWqfls;
WkZ qeWq, veak Wky dltaokjakq peWii Xa blskZ fkWZansWqa lo YlkqoWoy ql
qeapa msomlpap, W jWglofqy lb qea Yljjskfqy eWqe Wk fkZsXfqWXia,
skWifakWXia, WkZ fkZabaWpfXia ofdeq ql oabloj, Wiqao, lo WXlifpe fq fk
psYe jWkkao Wp peWii Xa gsZdaZ jlpq YlkZsYfta ql qea msXifY vaWi. 
   4. PeWq kl jWk, lo paq lb jak, Woa akqfqiaZ ql awYispfta lo pamWoWqa
ajlisjakqp lo moftfiadap bolj qea Yljjskfqy, Xsq fk YlkpfZaoWqflk lb
msXifY paotfYap; vefYe klq Xafkd ZapYakZfXia, kafqeao lsdeq qea lbbfYap
lb jWdfpqoWqa, iadfpiWqlo, lo gsZda ql Xa eaoaZfqWoy. 
   5. PeWq qea iadfpiWqfta WkZ awaYsqfta mlvaop lb qea OqWqa pelsiZ Xa
pamWoWqa WkZ ZfpqfkYq bolj qea gsZfYfWoy; WkZ, qeWq qea jajXaop lb qea
qvl bfopq jWy Xa oapqoWfkaZ bolj lmmoappflk, Xy baaifkd WkZ
mWoqfYfmWqfkd qea XsoZakp lb qea malmia, qeay pelsiZ, Wq bfwaZ maoflZp,
Xa oaZsYaZ ql W moftWqa pqWqflk, oaqsok fkql qea XlZy bolj vefYe qeay
vaoa lofdfkWiiy qWhak, WkZ qea tWYWkYfap Xa psmmifaZ Xy boansakq,
YaoqWfk, WkZ oadsiWo aiaYqflkp, fk vefYe Wii lo Wky mWoq lb qea blojao
jajXaop ql Xa WdWfk aifdfXia, lo fkaifdfXia, Wp qea iWvp peWii ZfoaYq. 
   6. PeWq aiaYqflk lb jajXaop ql paota Wp oamoaopakqWqftaW lb qea
malmia, fk WppajXiy, lsdeq ql Xa boaa; WkZ qeWq Wii jak eWtfkd
psbbfYfakq atfZakYa lb maojWkakq Yljjlk fkqaoapq vfqe WkZ WqqWYejakq ql
qea Yljjskfqy, eWta qea ofdeq lb psbboWda, WkZ YWkklq Xa qWwaZ lo
ZamoftaZ lb qeafo molmaoqy blo msXifY spap, vfqelsq qeafo lvk Ylkpakq,
lo qeWq lb qeafo oamoapakqWqftap pl aiaYqaZ, klo XlskZ Xy Wky iWv ql
vefYe qeay eWta klq fk ifha jWkkao WppakqaZ blo qea msXifY dllZ. 
   7. PeWq Wii mlvao lb pspmakZfkd iWvp, lo qea awaYsqflk lb iWvp, Xy Wky
Wsqelofqy, vfqelsq Ylkpakq lb qea oamoapakqWqftap lb qea malmia, fp
fkgsoflsp ql qeafo ofdeqp, WkZ lsdeq klq ql Xa awaoYfpaZ. 
   8. PeWq, fk Wii YWmfqWi lo YofjfkWi molpaYsqflkp, W jWk eWqe W ofdeq
ql ZajWkZ qea YWspa WkZ kWqsoa lb efp WYYspWqflk, ql Xa YlkbolkqaZ vfqe
qea WYYspaop WkZ vfqkappap, ql YWii blo atfZakYa fk efp bWtlo, WkZ ql
W pmaaZy qofWi WkZ fjmWoqfWi Xy lb efp tfYfkWda, vfqelsq velpa skWkfjlsp
Ylkpakq ea YWkklq Xa blskZ dsfiqy; klo YWk ea Xa YljmaiiaZ ql dfta
atfZakYa WdWfkpq efjpaib; qeWq kl jsk Xa ZamoftaZ lb efp ifXaoqy awYamq
Xy qea iWv lb qea iWkZ, lo qea gsZdjakq lb efp maWop. 
   9. PeWq awYappfta XWfi lsdeq klq ql Xa oansfoaZ, klo awYappfta bfkap
fjmlpaZ, klo Yosai WkZ skspsWi mskfpejakqp fkZfYqaZ. 
   10. PeWq dakaoWi vWooWkqp, veaoaXy Wk lbbfYao lo jappakdao jWy Xa
YljjWkZaZ ql paWoYe pspmaYqaZ miWYa vfqelsq atfZakYa lb W bWYq
YljjfqqaZ, lo ql pafza Wky maoplk lo maoplkp klq kWjaZ, lo velpa lbbakpa
fp klq mWoqfYsiWoiy ZapYofXaZ WkZ psmmloqaZ Xy atfZakYa, Woa dofatlsp
WkZ lmmoafWpfta WkZ lsdeq klq ql Xa doWkqaZ. 
   11. PeWq, fk Ylkqoltaopfap oapmaYqfkd molmaoqy, WkZ fqH psfqqf Xaqvaak
jWk fqkZ jWk, qea WkYfakq qofWi Xy gsoy fp moabaoWXia ql Wky lqeao, WkZ
lsdeq ql Xa eaiZ pWYoaZ. 
   12. PeWq qea boaaZlj lb qea moapp fp lka lb qea doaWq XsivWohp lb
ifXaoqy, WkZ YWk katao Xa oapqoWfkaZ Xsq Xy ZapmlqfY dltaokfkakqp. 
   13. PeWq W vaii-oadsiWqaZ jfifqfW, YljmlpaZ lb qea XlZy lb qea malmia,
qoWfkaZ ql Wojp, fp qea molmao, kWqsoWi, WkZ pWba Zabakpa lb W boaa
pqWqa; qeWq pqWkZfkd Wojfap, fk qfja lb maWYa, pelsiZ Xa WtlfZaZ, sp
ZWkdaolsp ql ifXaoqy; WkZ qeWq fk Wii YWpap qea jfifqWoy pelsiZ Xa skZao
pqofYq psXloZfkWqfls ql, WkZ dltaokaZ Xy, qea Yftfi mlvao. 
   14. PeWq qea malmia eWta W ofdeq ql skfbloj dltaokjakq; WkZ qeaoabloa,
qeWq kl dltaokjakq pamWoWqa bolj, lo fkZamakZakq lb, qea dltaokjakq lb
RfodfkfW lsdeq ql Xa aoaYqaZ lo apqWXifpeaZ vf@ qea ifjfqp qeaoalb. 
   15. PeWq kl boaa dltaokjakq, lo qea Xiappfkdp lb ifXaoqy, YWk Xa
moapaotaZ ql Wky malmia, Xsq Xy W bfoj WZeaoakYa ql gspqfYa, jlZaoWqflk,
qajmaoWkYa, bosdWifqy, WkZ tfoqsa, WkZ Xy boansakq oaYsooakYa ql
bskZWjakqWi mofkYfmiap. 
   16. PeWq oaifdflk, lo qea Zsqy vefYe va lva ql lso roaWqlo, WkZ qea
jWkkao lb ZfpYeWodfkd fq, YWk Xa ZfoaYqaZ lkiy Xy oaWplk WkZ YlktfYqflk,
klq Xy bloYa lo tfliakYa; WkZ qeaoabloa Wii jak Woa ansWiiy akqfqiaZ ql
qea boaa awaoYfpa lb oaifdflk, WYYloZfkd ql qea ZfYqWqap lb YlkpYfakYa,
WkZ qeWq fq fp qea jsqsWi Zsqy lb Wii ql moWYqfYa reofpqfWk bloXaWoWkaa,
ilta WkZ YeWofqy, qlvWoZp aWYe lqeao. 
   Pefp fjjloqWi ZaYiWoWqflk lb qea mofkYfmiap lb mlmsiWo pltaoafdkqy eWp
Xaak paq bloqe Wq iakdqe XaYWspa fq ajXlZfap fk fqpaib qea psXpqWkYa lb
Wii pfjfiWo ZaYiWoWqflkp fk qea lqeao YlilkfWi Ylktakqflkp, WkZ vWp
afqeao fkYlomloWqaZ fkql qea uaYiWoWqflk lb EkZamakZakYa fqpaib, vefYe
vWp WZlmqaZ qvakqy-qvl ZWyp iWqao, lo fkql qea aWoifapq WjakZjakqp lb
qea rlkpqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. Kb qea bfopq qak WjakZjakqp ql
qea rlkpqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, vXfYe jWy Xa YlkpfZaoaZ Wp
WZlmqaZ YlkqajmloWkalspiy vfqe qea rlkpqfqsqflk fqpaib, pfw jaoaiy
oaWbbfoj qea mofkYfmiap akskYfWqaZ fk Caloda IWplk'p Xfii lb ofdeqp. 
 
                JWqflkWi uaYiWoWqflk lb EkZamakZakYa. 
 
   Seak va Ylja ql W pqsZy lb qea uaYiWoWqflk lb EkZamakZakYa fqpaib va
bfkZ W oaWppaoqflk lb mofkYafmiap YlkYaokfkd qea ansWifqy lb jak, qeafo
skWifakWXia ofdeqp, qeWq dltaokjakq fp fkpqfqsqaZ ql paYsoa qelpa
ofdeqp, qeWq fq Zaoftap fqp gspq mlvaoWf bolj qea Ylkpakq lb qea
dltaosaZ, WkZ qea ofdeq lb qea malmia, veak fq XaYljap ZapqosYqfta lb
qelpa akZp, ql Wiqao lo WXlifpe fq WkZ fkpqfqsqa W kav dltaokjakq.  
   Abqao ZaYiWofkd qeWq ilkd apqWXifpeaZ dltaokjakqp pelsiZ klq Xa
YeWkdaZ blo ifdeq WkZ qoWkpfakq YWspap, fq molYaaZp ql WooWfdk qea
cofqfpe dltaokjakq blo W ilkd qoWfk lb WXspap WkZ spsomWqflkp. Sa jWy
dWqeao, bolj qea aksjaoWqflk lb qelpa WXspap, qea bliilvfkd YiWfjp jWZa
Xy qea oatlisqflkfpqp YlkYaokfkd qea ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ fjjskfqfap
lb Yfqfzakp: 
 1. Pea ofdeq lb oamoapakqWqflk fk qea iadfpiWqsoa, W ofdeq fkapqfjWXia
ql qeaj. 
 2. Pea ofdeq ql eWta oamoapakqWqfta XlZfap WppajXiaZ Wq spsWi WkZ
YljbloqWXia miWYap Ylktakfakq ql qea Zamlpfqloy lb qeafo msXifY oaYloZp.
 3. Pea ofdeq ql eWta boansakq pappflkp lb qea iadfpiWqsoa. 
 4. Pea ofdeq ql eWta W pypqaj lb ksqsoWifzWqflk iWvp. 
 5. Pea ofdeq ql eWta Wk fkZamakZakq gsZfYfWoy. 
 6. Pea ofdeq ql lmmlpa W jsiqfqsZa lb lbbfYap. 
 7. Pea ofdeq ql lmmlpa pqWkZfkd Wojfap fs qfja lb maWYa. 
 8. Pea ofdeq ql XWta qea Yftfi mlvao psmaoflo ql qea jfifqWoy mlvao. 
 9. Pea ofdeq ql oapfpq nsWoqaofkd lb WojaZ qollmp Wjlkd qeaj. 
 10. Pea ofdeq ql qoWZa vfqe qea lsqpfZa vloiZ. 
 11. Pea ofdeq ql Wp tlfYa fk qWwWqflk. 
 12. Pea ofdeq ql qofWi Xy W gsoy lb qea tfYfkWda. 
 13. Pea ofdeq lb ElYWi paib-dltaokjakq. 
 
                      Pea BaZaoWi rlkpqfqsqflk. 
 
   Sa eWta WioaWZy paak qeWq Zsofkd qea maoflZ fk vefYe qea OqWqap
Yl-lmaoWqaZ skZao WoqfYiap lb YlkbaZaoWqflk, qea ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ
fjjskfqfap lb qeafo Yfqfzakp vaoa ZaoftaZ awYispftaiy bolj qeafo
oapmaYqfta OqWqap, WkZ qeWq qea mlvao lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap ZfZ klq
awqakZ ql qea Ylkqoli lb qea fkZftfZsWi, pWta fk W bav ifjfqaZ WkZ
pmaYfbfaZ YWpap; WkZ qeWq Wp qeak YlkpqfqsqaZ qea QkfqaZ OqWqap ZfZ klq
Wqqajmq ql doWkq lo dsWoWkqaa ql qea fkZftfZsWi Yfqfzak Wky ofdeqp,
moftfiadap, lo fjjskfqfap, pWta ql Yfqfzakp lb lka OqWqa fk Wklqeao
OqWqa.(7) 
   Seak, smlk qea WZlmqflk lb qea BaZaoWi rlkpqfqsqflk, BaZaoWi mlvao
lmaoWqaZ ZfoaYqiy smlk fkZftfZsWi Yfqfzakp lb qea ifjfqaZ OqWqap, qea
ksjXao lb BaZaoWi dsWoWkqaap lb qeafo ofdeqp vWp awqakZaZ Wipl. Peapa
dsWoWkqaap vaoa qea kaYappWoy YlooaiWqftap lb qea pmaYfbfY mlvaoaop
doWkqaZ ql qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq, WkZ Woa qea psmoaja iWv lb qea iWkZ
lk qea psXgaYqp ql vefYe qeay oabao. 
   csq fq Xy kl jaWkp bliilvp bolj qefp qeWq qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq fp
psmoaja YlkYaokfkd Wii qea ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ fjjskfqfap lb qea
Yfqfzak. Kk qea YlkqoWoy, vefia fq fp psmoaja fs fqp pmeaoa WkZ
mlppappap Wjmia Wsqelofqy ql akbloaa qea mlvaop awmoappiy ZaiadWqaZ ql
fq Xy qea rlkpqfqsqflk, fq fp lkiy W dltaokjakq lb ZaiadWqaZ WkZ ifjfqaZ
mlvaop, WkZ qea OqWqap, fk blojfkd fq, awmoappiy oaqWfkaZ WkZ oapaotaZ
fk qeajpaitap qea WXplisqa Ylkqoli, ZfoaYqflk, WkZ pltaoafdkqy ltao
qeafo Yfqfzakp YlkYaokfkd W tWpq oapfZssj lb ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ
fjjskfqfap vefYe, moflo ql qea WZlmqflk lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk, qeay eWZ
oadsiWqaZ awYispftaiy.(8) Blo fkpqWkYa, fq eWp katao Xaak YljqakZaZ qeWq
qea rlkpqfqsqflk, Wp lofdfkWiiy boWjaZ, YoaWqaZ fk qea BaZaoWi
dltaokjakq Wky mlvao ql apqWXifpe Wky YlZa lb jskfYfmWi iWv WmmifYWXia
ql qea OqWqap Yljmlpfkd fq, oadsiWqfta lb Wii moftWqa ofdeqp Xaqvaak jWk
WkZ jWk fk plYfaqy, lo qeWq rlkdoapp jWy spsom qea mlvaop lb OqWqa
iadfpiWqsoap YlkYaokfkd psYe iadfpiWqflk. Pea Osmoaja rlsoq lb qea
QkfqaZ OqWqap eWp oamaWqaZiy qWhak lYYWpflk ql mlfkq lsq qeWq kl psYe
mlvao awfpqp, afqeao skZao qea lofdfkWi rlkpqfqsqflk lo Xy tfoqsa lb Wky
lb qea WjakZjakqp.(9) Ap va peWii paa iWqao, W tWpq Wjlskq lb ifqfdWqflk
vefYe eWp Wofpak skZao qea YlkpqfqsqflkWi WjakZjakqp eWp Xaak XWpaZ smlk
W YlkbspaZ klqflk qeWq qea TEEE, TER, WkZ TR AjakZjakqp fk plja vWy
WiqaoaZ WkZ awqakZaZ qea dakaoWi pYlma lb BaZaoWi mlvaop, atak ql qea
mlfkq lb abbaYqfkd qefp bskZWjakqWi YeWkda. csq Wk skXolhak ifka lb
BaZaoWi ZaYfpflkp eWp ZakfaZ qeWq psYe W YeWkda fk qea lodWkfY pqosYqsoa
lb qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq vWp afqeao YlkqajmiWqaZ lo abbaYqaZ Xy qea
WjakZjakqp, WkZ mlfkq lsq qeWq qea iadfpiWqflk vefYe rlkdoapp fp
WsqeaofzaZ ql akWYq skZao qea WjakZjakqp fp klq dakaoWi iadfpiWqflk smlk
qea ofdeqp lb Yfqfzakp, Xsq lkiy YaoqWfk YlooaYqfta iadfpiWqflk, fb psYe
Xa kaYappWoy, ql YlskqaoWYq OqWqa iadfpiWqflk molefXfqaZ Xy qea
WjakZjakqp smlk pmaYfWi psXgaYqp kWjaZ fk qea WjakZjakqp.(10) 
   Seak va Ylja ql awWjfka qea jsiqfqsZfklsp ZaYfpflkp lb qea Osmoaja
rlsoq lk nsapqflkp vefYe eWta Wofpak skZao qea WjakZjakqp fq vfii Xa
paak qeWq qea YWpap eWta blo qea jlpq mWoq klq lofdfkWqaZ fk Wky WiiadaZ
WYq lb qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq fktWZfkd qea pmeaoa lb OqWqa WYqflk, Xsq
smlk qea Ylkqakqflk jWZa Xy Yfqfzakp lb qea OqWqap qeWq BaZaoWi mlvaop,
Wp akiWodaZ Xy qea WjakZjakqp, Woa jsYe jloa bWo-oaWYefkd WkZ
oapqofYqfta smlk OqWqa mlvaop qeWk qea BaZaoWi Ylsoqp qeajpaitap eWta
Xaak vfiifkd ql WZjfq. Pea ZaYfpflkp oakZaoaZ Xy qea Osmoaja rlsoq eWta
fk Wk ltaoveaifsfkd jWglofqy lb YWpap Xaak WdWfkpq qea XolWZ abbaYq lb
qea YlkpqfqsqflkWi WjakZjakqp Wp Wsqelofzfkd awqakZaZ BaZaoWi mlvaop,
lo Wp oapqofYqfkd OqWqa mlvaop, YlkqakZaZ blo Xy qea Yfqfzakp; WkZ qeay
ZaYiWoa skWkfjlspiy qea Ylkqfksfkd mlvao lb qea OqWqap, klqvfqepqWkZfkd
qea WjakZjakqp, ql oadsiWqa awYispftaiy qea ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ
fjjskfqfap lb Yfqfzakp smlk qea jWqqaop fk fppsa, psXgaYq lkiy ql qea
mWoqfYsiWo ifjfqWqflkp kWjaZ fk qea WjakZjakqp.(10) 
   Oaaffkd klv qeWq qea ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ fjjskfqfap lb qea
Yfqfzakp Woa ZamakZakq, blo WYhklviaZdjasq WkZ molqaYqflk, smlk ZsWi
dltaokjakqp, gspq Wp qea WiiadfWkYa lb qea Yfqfzak fp Zsa ql ZsWi
dltaokjakqp, iaq sp kawq YlkpfZao qea pWbadsWoZp WkZ molqaYqflkp lb
qelpa ofdeqp lbbaoaZ ql qea Yfqfzak Xy qea BaZaoWi WkZ OqWqa
dltaokjakqp. AkZ, Wp qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq, Wiqelsde ifjfqaZ fk fqp
pmeaoa, fp psmoaja, WkZ Wp Wii lqeao ofdeqp, klq ZaoftaZ bolj lo
dsWoWkqaaZ Xy fq, ZamakZ blo qeafo oaYldkfqflk WkZ molqaYqflk smlk qea
OqWqap, qea loZaoiy jaqelZ lb YlkpfZaoWqflk vlsiZ paaj ql Xa, ql fknsfoa
bfopq veWq ofdeqp lb qea Yfqfzak qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq doWkqp lo
skZaoqWhap ql molqaYq, WkZ veWq fq eWp kafqeao doWkqaZ klo skZaoqWhak
ql dsWoWkqaa. Blo Wii ofdeqp klq pl doWkqaZ lo dsWoWkqaaZ Xy qea BaZaoWi
dltaokjakq Woa ZamakZakq blo qeafo awfpqakYa WkZ qeafo YlkqfksWkYa smlk
qea OqWqa lb vefYe qea fkZftfZsWi fp W Yfqfzak.(11) 
 
            Nfdeqp, Loftfiadap, WkZ Ejjskfqfap CoWkqaZ lo  
           CsWoWkqaaZ ql qea rfqfzak Xy qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. 
 
   Peapa jWy Xa YiWppfbfaZ Wp bliilvp:  
   1. Nfdeqp doWkqaZ lo dsWoWkqaaZ Xy qea rlkpqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ
OqWqap Wp lofdfkWiiy boWjaZ, lo Xy qea bfopq qvaita WjakZjakqp qeaoaql. 
    2. Nfdeqp doWkqaZ lo dsWoWkqaaZ Xy qea TEEE, TER, WkZ TR AjakZjakqp. 
 
    Bfopq, qeak, qea ofdeqp, moftfiadap, lo fjjskfqfap doWkqaZ lo
dsWoWkqaaZ ql qea Yfqfzak Xy qea rlspqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap Wp
lofdfkWiiy boWjaZ, lo Xy qea bfopq qvaita WjakZjakqp qeaoaql, Woa, fk
qea loZao lb qeafo aksjaoWqflk, lo Xy kaYappWoy fjmifYWqflk, Wp bliilvp:

   1. A ofdeq, PeWq Yfqfzakp lb qea OqWqap Yljmlpfkd qea Qkflk, eWtfkd
qea nsWifbfYWqflkp oansfpfqa blo aiaYqlop lb qea jlpq ksjaolsp XoWkYe
lb qea OqWqa iadfpiWqsoa, peWii mlppapp qea ofdeq WkZ moftfiada lb
aiaYqlop blo jajXaop lb qea Dlspa lb NamoapakqWqftap lb qea QkfqaZ
OqWqap Yelpak ataoy paYlkZ yaWo Xy qea malmia lb qea QkfqaZ Oqsqap.
(Aoq. 1, OaY. 2, ri. 1.)(12) 
   2. A moftfiada. PeWq psYe Yfqfzakp peWii Xa aifdfXia ql jajXaopefm lb
qea Dlspa lb NamoapakqWqftap, fb qeay mlppapp YaoqWfk nsWifbfYWqflkp lb
Wda, iakdqe lb Yfqfzakpefm, WkZ Woa fkeWXfqWkqp lb qea OqWqa bolj vefYe
qeay Woa Yelpak. (AoH 1, OaY. 2, ri. 2.)   3. A ofdeq. PeWq
oamoapakqWqftap WkZ ZfoaYq qWwap peWii Xa WmmloqflkaZ, Wjlkd qea pataoWi
OqWqap, WYYloZfkd ql qeafo oapmaYqfta ksjXaop, vefYe peWii Xa ZaqaosZkaZ
Xy WZZfkd ql qea velia ksjXao lb boaa maoplkp, fkYisZfkd qelpa XlskZ ql
paotfYa blo W qaoj lb yaWop, WkZ awYisZfkd EkZfWkp klq qWwaZ,
qeoaa-bfbqep lb Wii lqeao maoplkp. Pefp YiWspa fp, elvatao., WjakZaZ,
fk oapmaYq ql Wmmloqflkjakq lb oamoapakqWqflk, Xy qea TER AjakZjakq,
OaY. 2. (13) 
   4. A ofdeq. Pl eWta Wk aksjaoWqflk lo Yakpsp, ataoy qak yaWop,
WYYloZfkd ql iWv, ql Zaqaojfka qea XWpfp lb oamoapakqWqflk, Xsq vfqe W
moltfpl qeWq oamoapakqWqftap peWii klq awYaaZ lka blo ataoy 30,00K, Xsq
qeWq aWYe OqWqa peWii eWta Wq iaWpq lka oamoapakqWqfta. (Aoq. E, OaY.
2, ri.3, LWo. 2) (14) 
   5. A moftfiada. PeWq Yfqfzakp mlppappfkd ZabfkaZ (nsWifbfYWqflkp lb
Wda, iakdqe lb oapfZakYa, WkZ eWXfqWqflk, WeWii Xa aifdfXia Wp QkfqaZ
OqWqak pakWqlop. (Aoq. E, @. 3, 01. 3.) 
   6. Ak fjjskfqy. AdWfkpq qea qofWi lb fjmaWYejakqp Xy Wky lqeao XlZy
qeWk qea OakWqa, lo YlktfYqflk vfqelsq W YlkYsooakYa lb qvl-qefoZp lb
qea jajXaop moapakq; WkZ WdWfkpq Wky gsZdjakq fk psYe YWpa awqakZfkd
bsoqeao qeWk ql oajltWi bolj lbbfYa WkZ ZfpnsWifbfYWqflk ql eliZ WkZ
akgly Wky lbbfYa lb elklo, qospq, lo molbfq skZao qea QkfqaZ OqWqap.
(Aoq. E, @. 3, ri. 6.)(15) 
   7. Ak fjjskfqy. Bolj Wooapq, awYamq blo qoaWplk, bailky, lo XoaWYe lb
qea maWYa, vefia WqqakZfkd rlkdoapp Wp W jajXao lo dlfkd ql lo oaqsokfkd
bolj qea pWfka; WkZ bolj Xafkd nsapqflkaZ blo Wky pmaaYe lo ZaXWqa fk
afqeao Dlspa. (Aoq. E, OaY. 6, ri. 1.)(16) 
   8. A ofdeq. PeWq Wii Xfiip blo oWfpfkd oataksa peWii lofdfkWqa fk qea
Dlspa lb NamoapakqWqftap. (Aoq. E, OaY. 7, ri. 1.)(17) 
   9. A ofdeq. Pl eWta qea awaYsqfta pWkYqflk lb Wii iWvp Xabloa qeay
XaYlja abbaaqfta, skiapp qeay Xa mWppaZ ltao qea LoapfZakq'p taql. (Aoq.
E, OaY. 7, ri. 2.) (18) 
   10. A ofdeq. PeWq Wii Zsqfap, fjmlpqp, WkZ awYfpap fjmlpaZ Xy rlkdoapp
peWii Xa skfbloj qeolsdelsq qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. (Aoq. 1, OaY. 8, ri.
1.)(19) 
   11. Ak fjjskfqy. Bolj Wky iWvp mWppaZ Xy Wky OqWqa, lo lqeao Wsqelofqy
qeWk rlkdoapp, oadsiWqfkd Yljjaoaa vfqe bloafdk ksqflkp WkZ Wjlkd qea
pataoWi OqWqap, WkZ vfqe qea EkZfWk qofXap. (Aoq. E. OaY. 8, ri. 3.)(20)
   12. A ofdeq. Pl skfbloj BaZaoWi iWvp lb kWqsoWifzWqflk WkZ XWkhosmqay
qeolsdelsq qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. (Aoq. 1, OaY. 8, ri. 4.)(21) 
   13. A ofdeq. Pl W BaZaoWi YlfkWda WkZ pqWkZWoZ lb vafdeqp WkZ
jaWpsoap. (Aoq. 1, Oaa. 8. ai. 5.)(22) 
   14. A ofdeq. Pl Wk apqWXifpeaZ BaZaoWi mlpqWi pypqaj WkZ mlpq olWZp.
(Aoq. E, Oaa. 8, rH 6.)(23) 
   15. A ofdeq. Pl W BaZaoWi pypqaj lb mWqakq ofdeqp WkZ Ylmyofdeqp.
(Aoq. 1, OaY. 8, ri. 8.)(24) 
   16. A ofdeq. Pl W psmoaja Ylsoq WkZ W pypqaj lb baZaoWi Ylsoqp
fkbaoflo ql qea psmoaja Ylsoq. (Aoq. DE, caap. E WkZ 2; Aoq. 1, OaY. 8,
ri. 9.)(25) 
   17. A ofdeq Pl BaZaoWi molqaYqflk WdWfkpq mfoWYfap WkZ bailkfap
YljjfqqaZ lk qea efde paWp WkZ lbbakqfaqf WdWfivq qea iWv lb kWqflkp.
(Aoq. 1, OaY. 8, ri. 10.)(26) 
   18. Ak fjjvWfqy. AdWfkpq Wky ZaYiWoWqflk lb vWo lo qea doWkqfkd lb
iaqqaop lb jWonsa WkZ oamofpWi awYamq Xy qea QkfqaZ OqWqak. Aoq. 1, OaY.
8, ri. 4.)(27) 
   19. Ak fjjskfqy. AdWfkpq Wky WmmolmofWqflkp blo vWo msomlpap Xy
rlkdoapp, skZao fqp mlvao ql oWfpa WkZ psmmloq Wojfap, blo W ilsdao qaoj
qeWk qvl yaWop. (Aoq. E, Oaa. 8, ri. 12.)(28) 
   20. A ofdeq. Pl qea YoaWqflk WkZ jWfkqakWkYa lb W kWty Xy qea BaZaoWi
dltaokjakq (Aoq. 1, OaY. 8, ri. 13.)(29) 
   21. A ofdeq. Pl qea spa lb qea jfifqfW skZao qea YWii lb qea BaZaoWi
dltaokjakq, blo awaYsqfkd qea iWvp lb qea Qkflk, psmmoappfkd
fkpsooaYqflkp, WkZ oamaiifkd fktWpflkp. (Aoq. 1, Oaa. 8, 01. 15.)(30) 
   22. A ofdeq. Pl awYispfta BaZaoWi iadfpiWqflk Xy rlkdoapp ltao W
qaoofqloy klq awYaaZfkd qak jfiap pnsWoa Wp W paWq lb dltaokjakq, WkZ
ifha Wsqelofqy ltao Wii miWYap msoYeWpaZ blo bloqp, jWdWzfkap, WopakWip,
WkZ ZlYhyWoZp. (AoH 1, Oaa. 8, ri. 17.)(31) 
   23. A ofdeq. Pl qea moftfiada lb qea vofq lb eWXaWp Ylomsp, pWta veak
fq jWy Xa pspmakZaZ blo msXifY pWbaqy, fk qfja lb oaXaiiflk lo fktWpflk.
(Aoq. 1, OaY. 9, ri. 2.)(32) 
   24. Ak fjjskfqy. AdWfkpq Wky Xfii lb WqqWfkZao lo aw mlpq bWYql iWv.
(Aoq. 1, OaY. 9, ri. 3.)(33) 
   25. Ak fjjskfqy. AdWfkpq Wky YWmfqWqflk lo lqeao ZfoaYq qWw awYamq fk
molmloqflk ql qea Yakpsp WXlta moltfZaZ blo. (Aoq. 1, Oaa. 9, ri.
4.)(34) 
   26. Ak fjjskfqy. AdWfkpq Wky qWw lo Zsqy lk WoqfYiap awmloqaZ bolj Wky
OqWqa. (Aoq, E, Oaa. 9, ri. 5.)(35) 
   27. Ak fjjskfqy. AdWfkpq Wky moabaoakYa ql qea mloqp lb lka OqWqa ltao
qelpa lb Wklqeao; WkZ WdWfkpq qea akqoWkYa, YiaWoWkYa, lo mWyjakq lb
Zsqfap Xy tappaip XlskZ ql lo bolj qea mloqp lb lka OqWqa ql lo bolj qea
mloqp lb Wklqeao OqWqa. (Aoq. 1, OaY. 9, ri. 6.)(36) 
   28. Ak fjjskfqy. AdWfkpq qea doWkqfkd lb Wky qfqiap lb klXfifqy Xy qea
QkfqaZ OqWqap. (Aoq. 1, OaY. 9, ri. 8.)(37) 
   29. Ejjskfqfap. AdWfkpq Wky qoaWqy, WiifWkYa, lo YlkbaZaoWqflk akqaoaZ
fkql Xy Wky OqWqa, WkZ qea doWkqfkd lb iaqqaop lb jWonsa lo oamofpWi Xy
Wky OqWqa, WkZ WdWfkpq qea YlfkWda lb jlkay lo ajfppflk lb Xfiip lb
YoaZfq Xy Wky OqWqa WkZ qea jWhfkd lb Wkyqefkd Xsq dliZ WkZ pfitao Ylfk
W qakZao fk mWyjakq lb ZaXqp Xy Wky OqWqa; WkZ qea mWppWda lb Wky Xfii
lb WqqWfkZao lo aw mlpq bWYql iWv, lo iWv fsfmWfofkd qea lXifdWqflk lb
YlkqoWYqp, lo doWkq lb Wky qfqia lb klXfifqy Xy Wky OqWqa. (Aoq. 1, OaY.
10, ri. 1.)(38) 
   30. Ak fjjskfqy. Bolj qea iWyfkd lb Wky fjmlpq lo Zsqfap lk fjmloqp
lo awmloqp Xy Wky OqWqa, vfqelsq qea Ylkpajq lb rlkdoapp. (Aoq. E, Oaa.
10, ri. 2.)(39) 
   31. Ejjskfqfap. Bolj Wky Zsqy lb qlkkWda iWfZ Xy Wky OqWqa vfqelsq qea
Ylkpakq lb rlkdoapp, lo qea haamfkd lb qollmp lo pefmp lb vWo fk qfja
lb maWYa Xy Wky OqWqa, lo qea akqaofkd fkql Wk Wdoaajakq lo YljmWYq vfqe
Wklqeao OqWqa lo W bloafdk mlvao, lo akdWdfkd fk vWo skiapp WYqsWiiy
fktWZaZ lo fk psYe fjjaZfWqa ZWkdao Wp vfii klq WZjfq lb ZaiWy. (Aoq.
E, OaY. 10, ri. 3.)(40) 
   32. A moftfiada. Kb Xafkd moapfZakqfWi WkZ tfYamoapfZakqfWi aiaYqlo
fk qea jWkkao moltfZaZ Xy qea iadfpiWqflk lb. qea OqWqa. (Aoq. 11, OaY.
1, ri.1 WkZ 2.)(41) 
   33. A moftfiada. Kb Xafkd LoapfZakq moltfZaZ qea Yfqfzak mlppappap qea
oansfpfqa nsWifbfYWqflkp lb Xfoqe, Wda, WkZ oapfZakYa. (Aoq EE, OaY. 1,
ri. 4.)(42) 
   34. A moftfiada. Kb Xafkd RfYa-LoapfZakq psXgaYq ql qea pWja
nsWifbfYWqflkp Wp iWpq kWjaZ. (AoH 11, OaY. 1, ri. 4.) 
   35. A moftfiada. Kb psfkd fk qea baZaoWi Ylsoqp, lk qea qaojp WkZ
psXgaYq ql qea YlkZfqflkp lb gsofpZfYqflk paq bloqe fk qea rlkpqfqsqflk
WkZ iWvp. (Aoq. Eii, OaYp. E skZ 2.) 
   36. A ofdeq. Pl qofWi Xy gsoy fk qea OqWqa veaoa qea Yofja fp YeWodaZ
ql eWta Xaak YljjfqqaZ fk Wky qofWi blo Yofja fk W baZaoWi Ylsoq, awYamq
fk YWpa lb fjmaWYejakq, WkZ veak qea Yofja fp klq YljjfqqaZ vfqefk Wky
OqWqa qea qofWi ql Xa Wq psYe miWaa lo miWYap Wp rlkdoapp ZfoaYqp. (Aoq.
111, OaY. 2.)(43) 
   37. Ak fjjskfqy. Bolj qea YeWoda lb qoaWplk WdWfkpq qea QkfqaZ OqWqap,
awYamq blo iatyfkd vWo WdWfkpq qeaj, lo blo WZeaofkd ql qeafo akajfap,
dftfkd qeaj WfZ WkZ Yljbloq (Aoq EEE, OaY. 3, ri. 1. Oaa Kb PoaWplk,
psmoW, mm. 74 aq pan.) 
   38. A ofdeq. Pl ZajWkZ, fk YWpap lb qofWi blo qoaWplk, qea qapqfjlky
lb qvl vfqkappap ql qea pWja ltaoq WYq, lo W Ylkbappflk fk lmak alsoq,
Wp qea lkiy XWpfp, lb YlktfYqflk. (Aoq. EEE, OaY. 3, ri. 1.)(44) 
   39. Ak Ejjskfqy. AdWfkpq Wky WqqWfkZao lb qoaWplk vlohfkd Yloosmqflk
lb XillZ lo blobafqsoa, awYamq Zsofkd qea ifba lb qea maoplk WqqWfkqaZ.
(Aoq. EEE, OaY. 3, ri. 2.)(45) 
   40. A ofdeq. Pl ZajWkZ qeWq aWYe OqWqa peWii dfta bsii bWfqe WkZ
YoaZfq ql qea msXifY WYqp, oaYloZp, aqY., WkZ gsZfYfWi molYaaZfkdp lb
ataoy lqeao OqWqa. (Aoq. ER, OaY. 1.)(46) 
   41. A ofdeq. ik qea Yfqfzakp lb aWYe OqWqa ql akgly Wii qea Loftfiadap
WkZ fjjskfqfap lb Yfqfzakp fk qea pataoWi OqWqap. (Aoq. ER, OaY. 2, ri.
1.)(47) 
   42. A ofdeq. Pl ZajWkZ bolj Wky OqWqa qea awqoWZfqflk WkZ oajltWi lb
Wky maoplk vel peWii biaa qeaoaql, vel fp YeWodaZ, fk Wklqeao OqWqa,
vfqe qoaWplk, bailky, lo lqeao YoWka. (Aoq. ER, OaY. 21 ri. 2)(48) 
   43. A ofdeq. Pl ZajWkZ qea Zaiftaoy, lk YiWfj lb qea mWoqy akqfqfaZ,
lb Wky maoplk eaiZ ql paotfYa lo iWXlo, fk lka OqWqa, vel eWp apYWmaZ
ql Wklqeao OqWqa. (Aoq. ER, OaY. 2, 01. 3.)(49) 
   44. A ofdeq. Pl qea maoblojWkYa lb qea dsWoWkqaa lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap
qeWq ataoy OqWqa fk qea Qkflk peWii eWta W oamsXifYWk bloj lb
dltaokjakq, WkZ qeWq qea QkfqaZ OqWqap vfii molqaYq aWYe lb qeaj bolj
fktWpflk WkZ WdWfkpq ZljapqfY tfliakYa. (Aoq. ER, OaY. 4.)(50) 
   45. A ofdeq. Ek aWYe OqWqa ql ansWi psbboWda fk qea OakWqa. (Aoq.R.)

   Peapa Xafkd qea lkiy ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ fjjskfqfap dsWoWkqaaZ ql
Yfqfzakp Xy qea rlkpqfqsqflk fqpaib, qea bliilvfkd WZZfqflkWi WmmaWo fk
qea bfopq qvaita WjakZjakqp ql qea rlkpqfqsqflk:(51) 
   46. Ak fjjskfqy. AdWfkpq Wky iWv lb rlkdoapp oapmaYqfkd Wk
apqWXifpejakq lb oaifdflk, lo molefXfqfkd qea boaa awaoYfpa qeaoalb, lo
WXofZdfkd qea boaaZlj lb pmaaYe lo lb qea moapp. (Aoq. 1.)(52) 
   47. A ofdeq. Kb qea malmia maWYaWXiy ql WppajXia, WkZ ql maqfqflk qea
dltaokjakq blo W oaZoapp lb dofatWkYap. (Aoq. E)(53) 
   48. A ofdeq. Kb qea malmia ql haam WkZ XaWo Wojp. A ofdeq klq ql Xa
fkbofkdaZ. (Aoq. EE.)(54) 
   49. Ak fjjskfqy. Bolj qea nsWoqaofkd lb qollmp fk Wky elspa fk qfja
lb maWYa vfqelsq qea Ylkpakq lb qea lvkao, lo fk qfja lb vWo, awYamq fk
W jWkkao ql Xa moapYofXaZ Xy iWv. (Aoq. EEE.) 
   50. Ak fjjskfqy. AdWfkpq skoaWplkWXia paWoYeap lo pafzsoap. (Aoq.
ER.)(55) 
   51. A ofdeq. Pl ZajWkZ qeWq paWoYe vWooWkqp peWii klq fppsa awYamq
smlk molXWXia YWspa, psmmloqaZ Xy lWqe lo WbbfojWqflk WkZ mWoqfYsiWoiy
ZapYofXfkd qea miWYa ql Xa paWoaXaZ, WkZ qea maoplk lo qefkdp ql Xa
pafzaZ. (Aoq. ER.)(56) 
   52. A ofdeq. PeWq kl Yfqfzak Xa eaiZ ql Wkpvao ql qea BaZaoWi
dltaokjakq blo W YWmfqWi lo lqeaovfpa fkbWjlsp Yofja, skiapp lk W
moapakqjakq lo fkZfYqjakq lb W doWkZ gsoy, awYamq fk YWpap Wofpfkd fk
qea iWkZ lo kWtWi bloYap, lo fk qea jfifqfW, veak fk WYqsWi paotfYa.
(Aoq. R.)(57) 
   53. Ak fjjskfqy. Bolj Xafkd qvfYa msq fk galmWoZy lb ifba lo EfjX blo
qea pWja lbbakpa. (Aoq. R.)(58) 
   54. Ak fjjskfqy. Bolj Xafkd W vfqsapp WdWfkpq efjpaib. (Aoq. R.)(59)
   55. A ofdeq. Pl Zsa molYapp lb iWv Xabloa Xafkd ZamoftaZ lb ifba,,
ifXaoqy, lo molmaoqy. (Aoq. R.)(60) 
   56. A ofdeq. Pl gspq YljmakpWqflk blo Wky molmaoqy qWhak blo msXifY
spa. (Aoq. R.)(61) 
   57. A ofdeq. Pl pmaaZy WkZ msXifY qofWi fk Wii YWpap lb YofjfkWi
molpaYsqflkp Xy Wk fjmWoqfWi gsoy lb qea ZfpqofYq veaoafk Wky Yofja fp
YeWodaZ ql eWta Xaak YljjfqqaZ, qea ZfpqofYq ql eWta Xaak moatflspiy
WpYaoqWfkaZ Xy iWv; ql Xa fkblojaZ lb qea kWqsoa WkZ ,YWspa lb qea
WYYspWqflk; ql Xa YlkbolkqaZ vfqe qea vfqkappap WdWfkpq efj; ql eWta
Yljmsiploy molYapp blo lXqWfkfkd vfkappap fk efp bWtlo; WkZ ql eWta qea
WppfpqWkYa lb Yljkpai blo efp Zabakpa. (Aoq. RE.)(62) 
   58. A ofdeq. Ek psfqp Wq Yljjlk iWv, fktlitfkd W tWisa awYaaZfkd
qvakqy ZliiWop, ql W qofWi Xy gsoy. (Aoq. REE.)(63) 
   59. Ak fjjskfqy. Bolj eWtfkd Wky bWYq qofaZ Xy W gsoy oa-awWjfkaZ fk
Wky Ylsoq lb qea QkfvZ OqWqap, lqeaovfpa qeWk WYYloZfkd ql qea osiap lb
Yljjlk iWv. (Aoq. REE.)(64) 
   60. Ak fjjskfqy. AdWfkpq qea oansfoajakq lb awYapfffta XWfi, WdWfkpq
qea fjmlpfqflk lb awYappfta bfkap, WkZ WdWfkpq qea fkbifYqflk lb Yosai
WkZ skspsWi mskfpejakqp. (AoH REEE.)(65) 
   61. A ZaYiWoWqflk. PeWq qea aksjaoWqflk fk qea rlkqfqfqsqflk lb
YaoqWfk ofdeqp peWii klq Xa YlkpqosaZ ql Zaky lo ZfpmWoWda lqeaop
oaqWfkaZ Xy qea malmia. (Aoq. ET.)(66) 
   62. A dsWoWkqaa. PeWq qea mlvaop klq ZaiadWqaZ ql qea QkfqaZ OqWqap
Xy qea rlkpqfqsqflk, klo moefXfqaZ ql qea OqWqap, Woa oapaotaZ ql qea
OqWqap oapmaY-qftaiy, lo ql qea malmia. (Aoq. T.)(67) 
   Ek HilyZ t. uliifkplk, ZaYfZaZ lk IWy 16,1904, qea Osmoaja rlsoq pWfZ
qeWq qea bfopq afdeq WjakZvakqp ql qea rlkpqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap
eWta oabaoakYa ql mlvaop awaoYfpaZ Xy qea dltaokjakq lb qea QkfqaZ
OqWqapq WkZ klq ql qelpa lb qea pqWqap.(68)  
   Pea xiatakqe AjakZjakq ql qea rlkpqfqsqflk oaiWqap pfjmiy ql W
ifjfqWqflk lb BaZaoWi gsZfYfWi mlvao, WkZ qea Pvaibqe AjakZjakq ql qea
jWkkao fk vefYe moapfZakqfWi WkZ tfYa-moapfZakqfsi aiaYqlop peWii jaaq
WkZ YWpq WkZ Yaoqfby qea aiaYqloWi tlqa, WkZ ql qea jWkkao lb ZaYfZfkd
qea oapsiq; pl qeWq qeay eWta kl ZfoaYq pfdkfbfYWkYa lo XaWofkd lk qea
ofdeqp lb Yfqfzakpefm. 
   Pea bfopq qak WjakZjakqp ql qea rlkpqfqsqflk vaoa molmlpaZ ql qea
iadfpiWqsoap lb qea pataoWi OqWqap Xy qea Bfopq rlkdoapp, OamqajXao 25,
1789. Peay vaoa oWqfbfaZ Xy qea OqWqap, Xadfkkfkd vfqe Jav gaopay,
JltajXao 20, 1789, WkZ akZfkd vfqe RfodfkfW, uaYajXao 15, 1791. Peaoa
fp kl atfZakYa lk qea glsokWip lb rlkdoapp qeWq qea iadfWiWqsoap lb
rlkkaYqfYsq, CalodfW, lo IWppWYespaqqp oWqfbfaZ qeaj. Pea xiatakqe
AjakZjakq vWp molmlpaZ ql qea iadfpiWqsoap lb qea pataoWi OqWqap Xy qea
PefoZ rlkdoapp, OamqajXao 5, 1794, WkZ vWp ZaYiWoaZ ql eWta Xaak
oWqfbfaZ Xy qea iadfpiWqsoap lb qeoaa-blsoqep lb qea OqWqap, fk W
jappWda bolj qea LoapfZakq ql rlkdoapp ZWqaZ FWksWoy 8, 1798. 
   Pea Pvaibqe AjakZjakq ql qea rlkpqfqsqflk vWp molmlpaZ ql qea
iadfpiWqsoap lb qea pataoWi OqWqap Xy qea xfdeqe rlkdoapp, uaYajXao 12,
1803;, fk ifas lb qea lofdfkWi qefoZ mWoWdoWme lb qea bfopq paYqflk lb
qea paYlkZ WoqfYia, WkZ vWp ZaYiWoaZ WZlmqaZ fk W molYiWjWqflk lb qea
OaYoaqWoy lb OqWqa, OamqajXao 25, 1804. 
   Bolj 1804 ql 1865 qea rlkpqfqsqflk WkZ qvaita WjakZjakqp oajWfkaZ
skYeWkdaZ. 
   Eq vWp klq skqfi BaXosWoy 1, 1865, qeWq qea Pefoqaakqe AjakZjakq lo
bfopq lb qea doaWq "vWo WjakZjakqp" vWp molmlpaZ. Eq vWp ZaYiWoaZ
WZlmqaZ fk W molYiWjWqflk lb qea paYoaqWoy lb pqWqa, ZWqaZ uaYajXao 18,
1865. Pea Blsoqaakqe AjakZjakq vWp molmlpaZ Fska 16, 1866, WkZ ZaYiWoaZ
WZlmqaZ Fsiy 21, 1868. Pea Bfbqaakqe AjakZjakq vWp molmlpaZ BaXosWoy
27,1869, WkZ molYiWfjaZ Wp WZlmqaZ IWoYe 30, 1870. 
   Haq sp klv fknsfoa fkql qea ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ fjjskfqfap lb
Yfqfzakp, Wp Yfqfzakp lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap WkZ lb qeafo oapmaYqfta
OqWqap, Zsofkd qea bfopq patakqy-pfw yaWop lb qea Qkflk, WkZ WbqaovWoZp
awWjfka elv bWo qeapa ofdeqp eWta Xaak jlZfbfaZ, lo OqWqa WkZ BaZaoWi
Ylkqoli lb qeaj YeWkdaZ, Xy qea WjakZjakqp Ylkpansakq smlk qea doaWq
rftfi SWo. 
   Pea bliilvfkd oabiaYqflkp jspq oapsiq ql ataoy pqsZakq lb qea psXgaYq,
bolj qea Wbloadlfkd oaYfqWi. 
   Bfopq. PeWq qea YlooaiWqfta oaiWqflkp lb dltaokjakq WkZ Yfqfzakpefm
vaoa WXplisqa WkZ sknsWifbfaZ Wp Xaqvaak qea OqWqap WkZ qeafo Yfqfzakp
Wbqao qea OqWqap dWfkaZ fkZamakZakYa WkZ moflo ql qea blojWqflk lb qea
Qkflk. 
   OaYlkZ. PeWq qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq veak blojaZ vWp lka lb ifjfqaZ
pYlma WkZ mlvaop, WkZ Wbqao fqp blojWqflk, klqvfqepqWkZfkd qea YoaWqflk
WkZ oaYldkfqflk lb qea pfwqy-lZZ BaZaoWi ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ
fjjskfqfap Wp Yfqfzakp lb qea Qkflk, WXlta paq bloqe, W tWpq oapfZssj
lb mlvao WkZ Ylkqoli ltao qea ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ fjjskfqfap lb
qeafo Yfqfzakp oajWfkaZ fk qea OqWqap. 
   PefoZ. PeWq qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq, vefia psmoaja fk fqp pmeaoa, vWp
klq boWjaZ ql oaWYe, WkZ fqp YoaWqflk ZfZ klq WbbaYq, qea skZaiadWqaZ
mlvaop lb qea OqWqap, fk jskfYfmWi WbbWfop, ltao qeafo lvk Yfqfzakp WkZ
qeWq fqp mlvao ltao psYe vWp awmoappiy kadWqftaZ Xy qea fkpqosjakq vefYe
Xolsdeq fq fkql Xafkd. 
   Pefp fp pl jWkfbapq qeWq qea rlkpqfqsqflk jfdeq vaii eWta Xadsk vfqe
qea iWkdsWda lb qea iWpq lb qea qak bfopq WjakZjakqp, blo qea OqWqap
awfpqaZ Xabloa qeafo oamoapakqWqftap YoaWqaZ qea Qkflk Xy qea ZaiadWqflk
lb YaoqWfk aksjaoWqaZ mlvaop, WkZ fq dlap vfqelsq pWyfkd qeWq "qea
mlvaop klq ZaiadWqaZ ql qea QkfqaZ OqWqap Xy qea rlkpqfqsqflk Woa
oapaotaZ ql qea OqWqap oapmaYqftaiy lo ql qea malmia." 
   Pea ofdeqp lb Yfqfzakp, Xlqe Wp Yfqfzakp lb qea QkfqaZ OqWiqap WkZ lb
qea OqWqap, skZao kaWoiy ataoy YiWspa lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk WkZ qea bfopq
qvaita WjakZjakqp, vaoa bsiiy YlkpfZaoaZ WkZ ZabfkaZ Xabloa qea lsqXoaWh
lb lso doaWq rftfi SWo, Xy qea Osmoaja rlsoq lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. Pl
qea doaWq diloy lb qeWq qofXskWi fq jWy Xa qosiy pWfZ qeWq fqp
fkqaomoaqWqflkp eWta Xaak skftaopWiiy oaYldkfzaZ Wp vfpa, YlkpaotWqfta
WkZ gspq; qeWq fb fq eWp aooaZ Wq Wii fq eWp Xaak afqeao qlvWoZp qea
oapaotaZ mlvaop lb qea OqWqap qeWk qlvWoZp Wk akiWodajakq lb BaZaoWi
mlvao Xy fjmifYWqflk; qeWq blo qea jlpq mWoq fqp gsZdjakqp eWta oajWfkaZ
skWbbaYqaZ Xy qea awYfqajakqp WkZ YeWkdap lb Yftfi YlkbifYq; WkZ qeWq,
atak YlkYaokfkd psYe lb fqp ZaYfpflkp Wp eWta Xaak oataopaZ Xy qea ildfY
lb atakqp, qea vfpZlj WkZ gspqfYa lb fqp WYqflk smlk qea iWv WkZ qea
bWYqp qeak Xabloa fq Woa klv skftaopWiiy WZjfqqaZ, elvatao Xfqqaoiy qeay
jWy eWta Xaak WpmaopaZ Wq qea qfja qelpa ZaYfpflkp vaoa oakZaoaZ. 
   Pea bllqklqap lk qea bloadlfkd mWdap eWta paq bloqe ataoy ZaYfpflk lb
qea Osmoaja rlsoq smlk ataoy YiWspa lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk WkZ WjakZjakqp,
XaWofkd lk qea ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ fjjskfqfap lb Yfqfzakp, WkZ W
YWoabsi pqsZy lb qelpa ZaYfpflkp, Wp qeay oaiWqa ql aWYe lb qea psXgaYqp
WXlta paq bloqe, jspq Xa qea lkiy pWqfpbWYqloy olWZ ql W jWpqaoy lb qea
psXgaYqp. SeWq bliilvp fp W jaoa psobWYa fkZaw lb qea psXpqWkYa lb qea
ZaYfpflkp smlk qea jlpq fjmloqWkq lb qelpa nsapqflkp, fkqakZaZ ql
pqfjsiWqa ql W qelolsde pqsZy lb qea YWpap. 
   Pea YfqWqflk lb Wsqelofqfap fk YlkkaYqflk vfqe W pqWqajakq lb qea
jfklo qlmfYp fp ZaajaZ W psbbfYfakq oabaoakYa ql qeaj. 
   LolYaaZfkd ql YlkpfZao qea jloa fjmloqWkq qlmfYp fk qea loZao lb qeafo
moapakqWqflk WXlta, va Ylja bfopq ql qea psXgaYq ---- 
 
              PWwWqflk lb qea rfqfzakp (Nfdeq 3 WXlta). 
 
   Pea mlvao lb qWwWqflk lb qea Yfqfzak Xy qea OqWqap fp skifjfqaZ Xy iWv
pWta YlkYaokfkd qWwap lk awmloqp lo fjmloqp lo qlkkWda Zsqfap. Eq fp
ifjfqaZ fk qea QkfqaZ OqWqap Xy lkiy qeoaa YlkZfqflkp, qea bfopq Xafkd
qeWq fq YWkklq qWw awmloqp, qea paYlkZ qeWq ZfoaYq qWwap peWii Xa
WmmloqflkaZ Wjlkd qea pataoWi OqWqap WYYloZfkd ql qeafo oapmaYqfta
ksjXaop, WkZ qea qefoZ qeWq Wii Zsqfap, fjmlpqp, WkZ awYfpap peWii Xa
skfbloj qeolsdelsq qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. (69) 
   Pea doWkq lb qWwfkd mlvao ql qea QkfqaZ OqWqap Xy qea rlkpqfqsqflk eWp
Xaak eaiZ ql Xa Wk WXplisqa doWkq psXgaYq lkiy ql qea WXlta ifjfqWqflkp.
Iloaltao, qea mlvao lb qWwWqflk mlppappaZ Xy qea QkfqaZ OqWqap ltao
Yfqfzakp lb qea ufpqofYq lb rlisjXfW eWp Xaak eaiZ ql Xa Wp skifjfqaZ
Wp qeWq mlppappaZ Xy qea OqWqap ltao qeafo Yfqfzakp. 
   IWky YWpap eWta Wofpak fk vefYe qea nsapqflk vWp veaqeao qea
mWoqfYsiWo qWw fktlitaZ fk qea Ylkqoltaopy vWp W ZfoaYq qWw; Xsq fk Wii
psYe YWpap qea ZaYfpflk qsokaZ lk qeWq, Wp W nsapqflk lb bWYq, WkZ vWp
klq fkpqosYqfta XaylkZ qea skZaopqWkZfkd lb qea mWoqfYsiWo pqWqsqa
fktlitaZ; blo, vfqe qea kWqsoa lb qea qWw paqqiaZ, qea iadWi mofkYfmiap
WmmifYWXia ql fq vaoa qelpa pqWqaZ WXlta. 
   A jlpq qelolsde WkZ aweWspqfta ZfpYsppflk lb qea kWqsoa WkZ awqakq lb
BaZaoWi qWwfkd mlvao WkZ lb veWq Zlap WkZ Zlap klq Ylkpqfqsqa W ZfoaYq
qWw vfii Xa blskZ fk qea YWpa lb LliilYh t. BWojaop' H. & P. rl.(70) 
 
   Kb qea Ejjskfqy lb qea rfqfzak bolj Aooapq, vefia AqqakZfkd
   rlkdoapp, WkZ fk Clfkd ql WkZ Naqsokfkd bolj qea OWja, WkZ bolj
   cafkd MsapqflkaZ fk Aky Kqeao LiWYa blo Aky OmaaYe lo uaXWqa
   (Ejjskfqy 7 WXlta). 
 
   Pefp fp Wk liZ WkZ pWisqWoy moltfpflk fkqakZaZ ql paYsoa ql qea
oamoapakqWqfta qea sqjlpq Zadoaa lb boaaZlj fk qea ZfpYeWoda lb efp
msXifY Zsqfap. A pfjfiWo moltfpflk vfii Xa blskZ fk qea Ylkpqfqsqflkp
lb jlpq lb qea OqWqap Ylkaaokfkd qeafo OqWqa iadfpiWqlop, WkZ qea
moltfpflk vWp WZlmqaZ bolj qea moftfiadap WaYloZaZ ql jajXaop lb qea
cofqfpe LWoifWjakq. Ap ql qea kWqsoa WkZ awqakq lb qea moftfiada, qea
YWpa lb GfiXlsok t. Peljmplk(71) vfii Xa blskZ fkpqosYqfta. Io. FspqfYa
Oqloy fk efp rljjakqWofap lk qea rlkpqfqsqflk (Ov. 866) oabaop ql fq Wp
W "doaWq WkZ tfqWi moftfiada." 
 
   Kb qea fjjskfqy lb qea rfqfzak bolj OqWqa EkqaobaoakYa vfqe qea
   NadsiWqflk lb rljjaoYa vfqe Bloafdk JWqflkp, WkZ Wjlkd qea OataoWi 
   OqWqap WkZ vfqe qea EkZfWk PofXap  (Ejjskfqy 11 WXlta). 
 
   Pefp awYispfta mlvao lb oadsiWqfkd YljjaoYa vWp YlkbaooaZ smlk
rlkdoapp blo W oaWplk. Eq vWp qea lbbpmofkd lb jWky peloq-pfdeqaZ,
tawWqflsp, WkZ ZfpYofjfkWqfkd oadsiWqflkp fjmlpaZ Xy qea OqWqap smlk
tappaip bolj lqeao OqWqap akqaofkd qeafo mloqp, vefia qeay oaqWfkaZ qea
mlvao ql iadfpiWqa lk qea psXgaYq skZao qea AoqfYiap lb rlkbaZaoWqflk.
Pea qoWkpbao lb qea psXgaYq ql awYispfta BaZaoWi Ylkqoli vWp jWZa
ZaifXaoWqaiy Wbqao qeapa ajXWooWppfkd awmaofakYap. JaWoiy W eskZoaZ
yaWop Wdl qea Osmoaja rlsoq ZaYiWoaZ qeWq fq vWp ZlsXqbsi veaqeao Wky
lb qea atfip lb vaWhkapp skZao qea AoqfYiap lb rlkbaZoaoWqflk
YlkqofXsqaZ jloa ql qea WZlmqflk lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk qeWk qea YlktfYqflk
qeWq YljjaoYa lsdeq ql Xa oadsiWqaZ Xy rlkdoapp." 
   Jl YiWspa lb qea BaZaoWi rlkpqfqsqflk eWp dftak ofpa ql jloa
ifqfdWqflk qeWk qefp pl-YWiiaZ YljjaoYa YiWspa. Eq vWp bfopq fkqaomoaqaZ
Xy refab FspqfYa IWopeWii fk CfXXlkp t. KdZak,(72) WkZ fqp pYlma WkZ
iadWi abbaYq eWta Xaak skZao YlkpfZaoWqflk fk WXlsq qvl eskZoaZ WkZ
bfbqy YWpap pfkYa qeak ZaYfZaZ Xy qea Osmoaja rlsoq lb qea QkfqaZ
Oqsqap. IWky tlisjap eWta Xaak vofqqak YlkYaokfkd qea ofdeqp lb Yfqfzakp
skZao qefp YiWspa, WkZ fq vlsiZ Xa XaylkZ qea pYlma lb qefp vloh ql paq
bloqe atak Wk amfqlja lb qea ZaYfpflkp fkqaomoaqfkd fq oakZaoaZ Xy qea
Osmoaja rlsoq. 
   Sa peWii Ylkqakq lsopaitap vfqe W pqWqajakq lb W bav lb qea iaWZfkd
mofkYfmiap paqqiaZ Xy qea WZgsZfYWqaZ YWpap, WkZ qea oajWoh qeWq qea
ifqfdWqflk eWp, blo qea jlpq mWoq, Wofpak lsq lb WYqp lb OqWqa
iadfpiWqsoap, vefYe eWta Xaak YeWiiakdaZ Wp fktWZfkd qea awYispfta
moltfkYa lb rlkdoaap ql oadsiWqa fkqaopqWqa YljjaoYa, aqY. 
   Pea bfopq fjmloqWkq YWpa Wofpfkd skZao qefp YiWspa vWp, Wp WXlta
pqWqaZ, CfXXlkp t. KdZak,(73) WkZ qea iWpq YWpa lb fjmloqWkYa ZaYfZaZ
Xy qea Osmoaja rlsoq fp qea YaiaXoWqaZ pl-YWiiaZ "jaodao ZaYfpflk,"
fktlitfkd qea ofdeq lb rlkdoapp, fk qea awaoafpa lb fqp mlvao ql
oadsiWqa YljjaoYa, ql mWpp iWvp bloXfZZfkd qea jaodao lb YlomloWqflkp
lvkfkd mWoWiiai WkZ Yljmaqfkd ifkap WkZ akdWdaZ fk fkqaopqWqa
YljjaoYa.(74)  
   Pea jWpqao jfkZ lb IWopeWii fk qea bfopq YWpa WkklskYaZ qea bliilvfkd
bskZWjakqWi mofkYfmiap, vefYe oajWfk skZfpqsoXaZ: 
 1. PeWq qea doWkq lb mlvaop ql rlkdoapp, fk qea mWoqfYsiWop kWjaZ, vWp
klq lkiy WXplisqa WkZ ajXoWYaZ qea mlvao ql oadsiWqa kWtfdWqflk, Xsq vWp
awYispfta lb Wky ofdeqp lb OqWqap ql iadfpiWqa lk qea psXgaYq. 
 2. PeWq fq ZfZ klq WbbaYq qea ofdeq lb qea OqWqap ql iadfpiWqa lk
msoaiy fkqaokWi YljjaoYa lo ql akWYq fkpmaYqflk iWvp WkZ eaWiqe iWvp,
lo msoaiy mlifYa 
oadsiWqflkp. 
 3. PeWq qea iWvp iWpq kWjaZ "bloj W mloqflk lb qeWq fjjakpa jWpp lb
iadfpiWqflk vefYe ajXoWYap ataoyqefkd vfqefk qea qaoofqloy lb W OqWqa,
klq psooakZaoaZ ql qea dakaoWi dltaokjakq; Wii vefYe YWk Xa jlpq
WZtWkqWdalspiy awaoYfpaZ Xy qea OqWqap qeajpaitap. EkpmaYqflk iWvp,
nsWoWkqfka iWvp, eaWiqe iWvp lb ataoy ZapYofmqflk, Wp vaii Wp iWvp blo
oadsiWqfkd qea fkqaokWi YljjaoYa lb W OqWqa, WkZ qelpa vefYe oapmaYq
qsokmfha olWZp, baoofap, aqY., Woa Yljmlkakq mWoqp lb qefp jWpp. Jl
ZfoaYq dakaoWi mlvao ltao qeapa lXgaYqp fp doWkqaZ ql rlkdoapp, WkZ
Ylkpansakqiy qeay oajWfk psXgaYq ql OqWqa iadfpiWqflk." 
 4. csq veaoa qea OqWqap, fk qea awaoYfpa lb qea mlvaop iWpq jakqflkaZ,
akWYq iWvp vefYe Ylja fk YlkbifYq vfqe BaZaoWi iWvp oadsiWqfkd YljjaoYa,
qea WYqp lb qea OqWqa jspq yfaiZ ql qea iWvp lb rlkdoapp. PeWq qea
ksiifqy lb Wii psYe WYqp fp molZsYaZ Xy qea ZaYiWoWqflk qeWq qea
rlkpqfqsqflk fp psmoaja.(75) 
   Peolsdelsq Wii qea jsiqfqsZfklsp ifqfdWqflk vefYe eWp bliilvaZ Wofpfkd
skZao qefp YiWspa qea plskZkapp lb qeapa mofkYfmiap eWp katao Xaak
nsapqflkaZ. Eb qea YWpa eWp Wofpak smlk W OqWqa pqWqsqa qea nsapqflk eWp
Xaak, Zlap qea OqWqa pqWqsqa ZfoaYqiy iadfpiWqa lk qea bloXfZZak
psXgaYq? Eb pl, fq fp tlfZ. ulap fq Wiqelsde vfqefk qea dakaoWi pYlma
lb OqWqa mlvao, fk fqp abbaYq oadsiWqa fkqaopqWqa YljjaoYa, aqY.? Eb pl,
fq jspq yfaiZ ql qea awYispfta mlvao lb rlkdoapp ql Ylkqoli.(76) 
   Eb fq Xa W jaoa oadsiWqflk lb fkpmaYqflk, lo eaWiqe, lo awaoYfpa lb
qea sknsapqflkaZ mlifYa mlvaop lb qea OqWqa, WkZ fqp abbaYq lk YljjaoYa
Xa sqqaoaiy fkYfZakqWi WkZ klq ZaqaojfkWqfta, qeak fq fp W iWv vfqefk
qea mlvaop lb qea OqWqa. 
   Eb qea nsapqflk eWp Wofpak smlk W BaZaoWi pqWqsqa, qea bfopq fknsfoy
eWp fktWofWXiy Xaak, Ep qea iWv, bWfoiy YlkpqosaZ, W oadsiWqflk lb qeWq
YiWpp lb YljjaoYa YljjfqqaZ WXplisqaiy WkZ awYispftaiy Xy qea
rlkpqfqsqflk ql qea oadsiWqflk lb rlkdoapp? Eb pl, fq fp W tWifZ iWv,
blo qea mlvao ql iadfpiWqa fp Wp XolWZ Wp qea doWkq lb awYispfta
Ylkqoli. 
   Peapa nsapqflkp eWta Wofpak fk fkbfkfqa tWofaqy WkZ Yljmiawfqy,
moapakqfkd kav WpmaYqp fk aWYe psYYappfta YWpa, WkZ fq fp fjmlppfXia ql
dakaoWifza qeaj fk qefp ZfpYsppflk. Pea lmmlpfkd tfavp fk aWYe YWpa Woa
qea oapsiq lb qvl qealofap vefYe eWta dftak ofpa ql jlpq lb qea
Ylkqoltaopfap Xaqvaak BaZaoWi WkZ OqWqa Wsqelofqy, tfz., lk qea lka
eWkZ, qea qealoy lb XolWZ iWqfqsZfkWofWk YlkpqosYqflk lb BaZaoWi mlvaop,
WkZ, lk qea lqeao, qea qealoy lb pqofYq YlkpqosYqflk. Lsopsfkd qea lka
lo qea lqeao lb qeapa qealofap, jak lb qea efdeapq fkqaiiaYq WkZ
YeWoWYqao eWta, bolj qea blskZWqflk lb qea dltaokjakq, Xaak WooWyaZ fk
lmmlpfqflk ql aWYe lqeao smlk ataoy fjmloqWkq nsapqflk lb YlkpqosYqflk
qeWq eWp Wofpak, WkZ maoeWmp kl jloa pqofhfkd fiispqoWqflk lb qefp
fooaYlkYfiWXia YlkbifYq lb tfavp jWy Xa blskZ fk lso velia gsZfYfWi
ifqaoWqsoa qeWk fk qea aWokapq, Wijlpq Wkdoy, ZfpYloZWkYa lb lso Osmoaja
rlsoq fk qea iWpq fjmloqWkq ZaYfpflk lk qefp YljjaoYa YiWspa.(77) 
   csq qea YlkpqfqsqflkWi fkefXfqflk Zlap klq moatakq qea OqWqap bolj
akWYqfkd iWvp vefYe moatakq klk-oapfZakqp bolj akdWdfkd fk YaoqWfk
YiWppap lb ajmilyjakqp vfqefk qeafo ifjfqp. OsYe, blo awWjmia, fp qea
ofdeq lb W OqWqa ql ifjfq qea ofdeq ql bfpe WkZ eskq, vfqefk eao XloZaop
ql eao lvk Yfqfzakp. Eq eWp Xaak eaiZ qeWq qea OqWqap ZfZ klq fktapq qea
BaZaoWi dltaokjakq vfqe Wky mloqflk lb qeafo mlvao WkZ Ylkqoli ltao
bfpefkd WkZ eskqfkd vfqefk qeafo XloZaop; qeWq qea bfpe WkZ peaiibfpe
WkZ dWja fk ataoy OqWqa Xailkd ql, maYsifWoiy WkZ lb ofdeq, WkZ bloj
mWoq lb qea bllZ psmmiy lb, qea malmia fk aWYe OqWqa, WkZ qeWq fq fp
vfqefk qea mlifYa mlvaop lb qea OqWqa, vfqelsq Wky ofdeq lb fkqaobaoakYa
Xy BaZaoWi Wsqelofqy, ql Zaqaojfka vel peWii WkZ vel peWii klq qWha qea
bfpe WkZ dWja vfqefk eao XloZaop, WkZ atak ql molefXfq qea pefmmfkd lb
qea pWja XaylsZ qea ifjfqp lb qea OqWqa. Pesp veak W RfodfkfW iWv
mskfpeaZ W Yfqfzak lb IWoyiWkZ blo qWhfkd lypqaop bolj RfodfkfW lypqao
XaZp, WkZ ea YiWfjaZ qeWq ea vWp akdWdaZ fk YljjaoYa, qea Osmoaja rlsoq
pspqWffkaZ qea OqWqa iWv, WkZ ZakfaZ qea YiWfj lb ifYakpa ql bfpe fk
RfodfkfW vWqaop Wp W jWqqao lb YljjaoYfWi ofdeq.(78) Ol, W iWv lb
rlkkaYqfYsq oadsiWqfkd qea jWkkao lb qWhfkd dWja fk qeWq OqWqa WkZ
bloXfZZfkd fqp awmloqWqflk vWp eaiZ tWifZ.(79) Pea Zsqy lb moapaotfkd
qea dWja vWp ZaYiWoaZ ql Xa W qospq blo eao lvk malmia. AkZ OqWqa iWvp
molefXfqfkd aweWspqfta jaqelZp lb bfpefkd fk vWqaop vfqefk OqWqa
gsofpZfYqflk, lo qea spa lb ZapqosYqfta fkpqosjakqp, Woa vfqefk qea
mlvaop lb qea OqWqa.(80) 
 
        Pea Nfdeq lb qea rfqfzak ql qea Sofq lb DWXaWp rlomsp 
                           (Nfdeq 23 WXlta) 
 
   ciWYhpqlka YWiip qea vofq lb XWXaWp Ylomsp "qea jlpq YaiaXoWqaZ vofq
fk qea xkdifpe iWv,"(81) WkZ ea oabaop ql qea osfklsp DWXaWp rlomsp AYq
lb xkdiWkZ, 31 reWoiap EE, Y. 2, Wp "boansakqiy YlkpfZaoaZ Wp Wklqeao
IWdkW reWoqW." 
   Pea Osmoaja rlsoq lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap eWp YeWoWYqaofzaZ fq: "Pea
doaWq vofq lb eWXasp Ylomsp eWp Xaak blo Yakqsofap apqaajaZ qea Xapq WkZ
lkiy psbbfYfakq Zabakpa lb maoplkWi boaaZlj. Ek xkdiWkZ, Wbqao W ilkd
pqosddia, fq vWp bfojiy dsWoWkqaaZ Xy qea bWjlsp DWXaWqf rlomsp AYq lb
IWy 27, 1679. - - Eq vWp Xolsdeq ql AjaofYW Xy qea Ylilkfpqp WkZ YiWfjaZ
Wp Wjlkd qea fjjajlofWi ofdeqp ZapYakZaZ ql qeaj bolj qeafo
WkYapqlop.(82) Kb qefp vofq fq jWy Xa pWfZ qosiy qeWq fq XWp aifYfqaZ
jloa akYljfsjp bolj XakYe WkZ XWo qeWk Wky lqeao fk qea Xllh, WkZ qeWq
ZfpYsppflk lb fq paajp ql Wolspa veWqatao lb ailnsakYa gsZdap WkZ
WZtlYWqap jWy mlppapp. 
   Ek bloj fq fp W vofq ajWkWqfkd bolj qea gsZfYfWi plsoYa fkqospqaZ vfqe
fqp haamfkd WkZ fppsWkYa, ZfoaYqaZ ql qea YspqlZfWk lb Wky maoplk
ZaqWfkaZ lk W YofjfkWi lo W Yftfi YeWoda, ZfoaYqfkd efj ql molZsYa qea
XlZy lb qea maoplk fk YspqlZy Wq W qfja WkZ miWYa ZapfdkWqaZ fk qea
vofq, qldaqeao vfqe qea YWspap lb efp Zaqakqflk, WkZ qeak WkZ qeaoa ql
psXjfq ql WkZ oaYafta veWqatao gsZdjakq qea gsZda lo Ylsoq WvWoZfkd qea
vofq peWii YlkpfZao fk qeWq XaeWib. Pea kWja lb qea vofq lofdfkWqaZ fk
qea bWYq qeWq Wq qea qfja fq YWja fkql spa Wii vofqp fk xkdiWkZ vaoa
vofqqak fk HWqfk, WkZ qefp mWoqfYsiWo vofq ZfoaYqaZ qea YspqlZfWk lb qea
mofplkao "eWXaWp Ylomsp," "qels peWiq eWta qea XlZy" lb pl WkZ pl, Wq
psYe WkZ psYe qfja WkZ miWYa. 
   Eq fp klq vfqefk qea msomlpa lb qefp vloh ql aiWXloWqa qea Zfbbaoakq
hfkZp lb vofqp lb eWXaWp Ylomsp WsZ qea Zfbbaoakq msomlpap blo vefYe
qeay Woa fktlhaZ. PeWq jWy Xa paak Xy oabaoakYa ql qea Wsqelofqfap
nslqaZ. Peaoa vaoa vofqp lb eWXaWp Ylomsp WZ oapmlkZakZsj, lo ql akWXia
qea mWoqy Wmmiyfkd blo qea vofq ql lXqWfk Wk Wkpvao lb plja ploq bolj
qea mWoqy fk YspqlZy; WkZ vofqp WZ pWqfpbWYfakZsj, lo ql pWqfpby W
gsZdjakq lo lqeao ZajWkZ, vefYe vofq Zlap klq awfpq vfqe sp; lo WZ
molpadsakZj, WZ qapqfbfYWkZsj, WZ ZaifXaoWkZsj, ql molpaYsqa pljaqefkd,
ql qapqfby WXlsq pljaqefkd, ql ZaifXaoWqa WXlsq pljaqefkd. Eq fp W
Yljjlk qefkd, blo awWjmia, veaoa W mofplkao YlkbfkaZ fk gWfi lo
makfqakqfWoy fp W kaYYappWoy vfqkapp Wq W qofWi, ql eWta efj molZsYaZ
fk Ylsoq Xy W vofq lb eWXaWp Ylomsp WZ qapqfbfYWkZsj fppsaZ Xy qea qofWi
gsZda lo lqeao Wsqelofqy. 
   csq qea Yljjlk vofq qea lka YeaofpeaZ Wp klka lqeao, fp qea vofq lb
eWXaWp Ylomsp WZ psXgfYfakZsj aq oaYfmfakZsj, YljsWWkZfkd qea YspqlZfWk
ql molZsYa qea XlZy lb efp mofplkao WkZ psXjfq ql WkZ oaYafta veWqatao
gsZdjakq qea gsZda lo Ylsoq WvWoZfkd qea vofq pXWii paa bfq ql oakZao.
Pea mlvao lb qea gsZda lo Ylsoq fppsfkd qea vofq fp, smlk qea molZsYqflk
lb qea WYYspaZ qldaqeao vfqe qea YWspap lb efp Zaqakqflk, WkZ Wbqao
eaWofkd qea jWqqao bsiiy, ql ZfpYeWoda efj, WZjfq efj ql XWfi, lo oajWkZ
efj ql YspqlZy. JaWoiy Wii qea OqWqap eWta dsWoWkqaap lb qea moftfiadap
lb qea vofq lb XWXasp Ylomsp fk qeafo Ylkpqfqsqflkp, WkZ Wii eWta
pqWqsqap moltfZfkd blo qea jWkkao lb fqp fppsfkd. 
   csq qeaoa fp qefp ZfpqfkYqflk Xaqvaak vofqp lb XWXaWp Ylomsp fppsaZ
Xy BaZaoWi Ylsoqp WkZ gsZdap WkZ qelpa fppsaZ Xy OqWqa Ylsoqp WkZ
gsZdap. A vofq jWy fppsa bolk BaZaoWi Wsqelofqy ql W maoplk eliZfkd
Wklqeao fk YspqlZy skZao OqWqa Wsqelofqy, fk YaoqWfk YWpap.(83) csq W
OqWqa Ylsoq lo gsZda YWkklq fppsa W vofq lb XWXaWp Ylomsp WdWfkpq W
maoplk eWtfkd W mofplkao fk YspqlZy skZao qea Wsqelofqy lb qea QkfqaZ
OqWqap.(84) 
   Pea oaWplk blo qea ZfpqfkYqflk fp lXtflsp bolj qea boWja lb qea
dltaokjakq, blo qea BaZaoWi gsofpZfYqflk fp, fk fqp pmeaoa, psmoaja, WkZ
veaoa BaZaoWi WkZ OqWqa iWvp YlkbifYq qea iWqqao jspq yfaiZ ql qea
blojao, WkZ qea tfav lb qeafo gsofpZfYqflk qWhak Xy BaZaoWi qofXskWip
jspq moatWfi. Ol qeWq vefia Wk fknsfoy Xy W BaZaoWi qofXskWi fkql W
Zaqakqflk skZao OqWqa Wsqelofqy vlsiZ Xa ZaqaojfkWqfta, W ifha fknsfoy
Xy W OqWqa qofXskWi fkql W Zaqakqflk skZao BaZaoWi Wsqelofqy vlsiZ klq
Xa ZaqaojfkWqfta lo lXifdWqloy lk qea BaZaoWi Wsqelofqy.(85) 
   Pea YWpap YfqaZ WXlta fk qea klqa WqqWYeaZ ql qea pqWqajakq lb qea
ofdeqp lb qea Yfqfzak ql qea vofq lb eWXaWp Ylomsp (klqa 4, m. 125) vfii
bsokfpe qea OqsZakq vfqe psYe bsoqeao fkblojWqflk Wp ea jWy Zapfoa
YlkYaokfkd qea lofdfk, kWqsoa WkZ efpqloy lb, WkZ qea jWkkao lb Wmmiyfkd
blo, qea vofq, WkZ qea YWpap ql vefYe fq Zlap klq awqakZ, Wp vaii Wp
qelpa ql vefYe fq Zlap awqakZ. Sa jWy iaWta qea psXgaYq vfqe qea bfkWi
oajWoh qeWq qea pspmakpflk lb qea vofq, kl jWqqao veWq jWy eWta Xaak qea
awfdakYy lk vefYe psYe WYqflk eWp Xaak gspqfbfaZ, eWp WivWyp Xaak tfavaZ
vfqe qea sqjlpq gaWilspy Xy qea AjaofYWk malmia, WkZ qea lmfkflk lb
refab FspqfYa PWkay fk qea eWXaWp Ylomsp YWpa lb xw m. IfiifdWk (86) fp
lka lb qea bfkapq mfaYap lb gsZfYfWi ailnsakYa fk AjaofYWk
gsofpmosZakYa. 
 
   Kb qea Ejjskfqy lb qea rfqfzak AdWfkpq cfiip lb AqqWfkZao WkZ xw
   Llpq BWYql HWvp. (Ejjskffqy 24 WXlta). 
 
   Pefp fjjskfqy fp dsWoWkqaaZ, Xlqe Wp WdWfkpq qea JWqflk WkZ qea OqWqa
(Aoq. 1, OaY. 9, ri. 3, WkZ Aoq. E, Oaa. 10, ai. 1.)(87) 
   A Xfii lb WqqWfkZao fp W iadfpiWqfta WYq vefYe fkbifYqp mskfpejWakqp
vfqelsq W gsZfYfWi qofWi.(88) OsYe Xfiip vaoa, fk xkdiWkZ, pljaqfjap
ZfoaYqaZ WdWfkpq fkZftfZsWip Xy kWja WkZ pljaqfjap WdWfkpq W YiWpp. Peay
vaoa YlkqoWoy ql qea velia pmfofq lb lso fkpqfqsqflkp, WkZ pl vaoa
bloXfZZak Xy dakaoWi Ylkpakq fk qea rlkpqfqsqflk, Xlqe Wp WdWfkpq qea
JWqflk WkZ qea OqWqa. 
   Jl nsapqflk lb fjmloqWkYa Wolpa bolj Wky Wqqajmq ql mWpp psYe jaWpsoap
skqfi qea maoflZ lb lso rftfi SWo, veak iWvp akWYqaZ Xy Ifpplsof WkZ
Sapq RfodfkfW, WkZ atak qea osiap WZlmqaZ Xy qea Osmoaja rlsoq lb qea
QkfqaZ OqWqap fqpaib, vaoa YeWiiakdaZ Wp fk abbaYq Xfiip lb WqqWfkZao.
Pea ZfpYsppflkp fk qea Wodsjakqp WkZ lmfkflkp fk qea YWpa lb rsjjfkdp
t. Ifpplsof,(89) WkZ xw m. CWoiWkZ,(90) Woa bsii lb efpqlofYWi WkZ iadWi
fkblojWqflk lk qefp psXgaYq, WkZ pelsiZ Xa YWoabsiiy oaWZ Xy qea
pqsZakq. 
   "Ak aw mlpq bWYql iWv fp lka vefYe oakZaop Wk WYq mskfpeWXia fk W
jWkkao fk vefYe fq vWp klq mskfpeWXia veak fq vWp YljjfqqaZ." Pea OqWqa
iadfpiWqsoa YWk mWpp kl aw mlpq bWYql iWv.(91) Pefp fp qea iWkdsWda lb
refab FspqfYa IWopeWii fk qea bfopq YWpa fk vefYe psYe iadfpiWqflk YWja
skZao qea aya lb qea Osmoaja rlsoq. AkZ lb qea oaWplkp iaWZfkd ql qea
WZlmqflk lb qelpa YiWspap lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk bloXfZZfkd psYe
iadfpiWqflk afqeao Xy qea JWqflk lo qea OqWqa, ea pWfZ: "SeWqatao
oapmaYq jfdeq eWta Xaak baiq blo qea OqWqa pltaoafdkqfap, fq fp klq ql
Xa ZfpdsfpaZ qeWq qea boWjaop lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk tfavaZ vfqe plja
Wmmoaeakpflk qea tfliakq WYqp vefYe jfdeq dolv lsq lb qea baaifkdp lb
qea jljakq.... Pea oapqofYqflkp lk qea iadfpiWqfta mlvao lb qea OqWqap
Woa lXtflspiy blskZaZ fk qefp pakqfjakq." 
   csq Wk WYq fjmlpfkd W psYYapppflk qWw lk Wk apqWqa Wbqao fqp
Zatlisqflk, Zsofkd qea maoflZ lb WZjfkfpqoWqflk, vWp eaiZ klq ql Xa Wk
aw mlpq bWYql iWv. (92) 
 
   Kb qea Ejjskfqy lb qea rfqfzak AdWfkpq OqWqa HWvp EjmWfofkd qea
   KXifdWqflk lb rlkqoWYqp (Ejjskfqy 29 WXlta). 
 
   Pea pWja oaWplkp vefYe moljmqaZ qea BaZaoWi dsWoWkqaa WdWfkpq qea
mWppWda lb Xfiip lb WqqWfkZao lo aw mlpq bWYql iWvp Xy qea OqWqap
ZlsXqiapp molZsYaZ qefp dsWoWkqaa Wipl.(93) Eq eWp dftak ofpa ql Wk
fjjakpa Wjlskq lb ifqfdWqflk. Pea mofkYfmia fp pl miWfk qeWq W pqWqajakq
lb qea iWv fp psbbfYfakq, Xsq qea ZfbbfYsiqy WkZ ZlsXq fk qea jWky YWpap
qeWq eWta Ysppflk lb qea kWqsoa WkZ awqakq lb qea ofdeqp lbb qea Wofpak
eWta Xaak fk Zaqaojfkfkd veaqeao qea OqWqa iWv WppWfiaZ fk W LWoqfYsiWo
YWpa ZfZ fjmWfo qea tapqaZ ofdeq YiWfjaZ. 
   Ap jWy Xa paak Xy oabaoakYa ql qea ilkd ifpq lb Wsqelofqfap YfqaZ fk
YlkkaYqflk vfqe qea pqWqajakq lb qefp fjjskfqy, fq vlsiZ Xa fjmlppfXia
ql YlkpfZao, fk qefp tlisja, qea ksjaolsp meWpap vefYe qea ZfpYspflk lb
qea kWqsoa WkZ awqakq lb qea ofdeqp lb qea Yfqfzak skZao qefp YiWspa eWp
WppsjaZ. PeWq vlsiZ jWha W tlisja fk fqpaib. 
   Pea YWpa vefYe paqp bloqe vfqe jlpq iaWokfkd WkZ WXfifqy qea kWqsoa
WkZ awqakq lb qefp mWoqfYsiWo BaZaoWi dsWoWkqaa, WkZ qea lka jlpq
boansakqiy YfqaZ, fp reWoiap Nftao cofZda t. SWooak cofZda.(94) Eq vWp
ZaYfZaZ fk 1837, WkZ qea lmfkflk lb qea Ylsoq vWp ZaiftaoaZ Xy refab
FspqfYa PWkay fk lka lb qea pqolkdapq lb efp jWky WXia lmfkflkp. csq
qeaoa vaoa qeoaa Zfppakqp. Pea Zfppakqfkd lmfkflkp lb Io. FspqfYa IYHaWk
WkZ Io. FspqfYa Oqloy, qea iWqqao YlkYsooaZ fk Xy Io. FspqfYa Peljmplk,
Woa psYe pqofhfkd, mlvaobsi moapakqWqflkp lb lmmlpfkd tfavp qeWq fk qeaj
fp blskZ qea daoj lb jWky W psXpansakq abbloq jWZa ql skpaqqia qea
mofkYfmiap bfwaZ Xy qea doaWq ZaYfpflk. Pefp YWpa vWp YlkbfkaZ, elvatao,
ql W ZfpYsppflk lb elv bWo msXifY doWkqp lb boWkYefpap Woa oatlYWXia Xy
OqWqa iadfpiWqflk vfqelsq tfliWqfkd qea YiWspa lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk WXlta
oabaooaZ ql. Eq ZfZ klq fktlita YlkpfZaoWqflk lb jWky lqeao YiWppap lb
OqWqa iadfpiWqflk smlk vefYe qea nsapqflk lb qea fjmWfojakq lb YlkqoWYqp
eWp Wofpak. 
   Kka iaWZfkd ZfpqfkYqflk, elvatao, oskkfkd qeolsde qea ZaYfpflkp,
pelsiZ Xa Xofabiy oabaooaZ ql, ql vfq: Pea molefXfqflk Zlap klq oapqoWfk
qea OqWqap bolj YeWkdfkd oajaZfap, WkZ W YeWkda fk W oajaZy moltfZaZ ql
akbloYa W ofdeq fp klq kaYappWofiy Wk fjmWfojakq lb qea ofdeq
fqpaib.(95) 
   Pl W bsii Yljmoaeakpflk Xy qea moWYqfYfkd iWvyao lb qea jaWkfkd lb
qefp YiWspa WkZ fqp XaWofkd smlk OqWqa iadfpiWqflk, W pqsZy lb qea
Wsqelofqfap YfqaZ fk qea bllqklqa fp kaYappWoy, fkZaaZ fkZfpmakpWXia.
Ap qeaoa fp kl jfZZia dolskZ Xaqvaak qefp Xofab YlkpfZaoWqflk, WkZ lka
pl aiWXloWqa qeWq fq vlsiZ lYYsmy skvWooWkqaZ pmWYa fk qefp dakaoWi
qoaWqfpa, qea psXgaYq fp iabq ql plja lqeao Wsqelo vel peWii ZaWi vfqe
fq Wp W pmaYfWiqy. 
 
         Kb qea Nfdeq lb qea rfqfzakp lb xWYe OqWqa  
         ql Aii qea Loftfiadap WkZ Ejjskfqfap lb  
         rfqfzakp fk qea OataoWi OqWqap.  
         (Nfdeq 41 WXlta). 
 
   Pefp moltpflk vWp fk qea AoqfYiap lb rlkbaZaoWqflk. EkZaaZ, fq vWp qea
lkiy ZfoaYq dsWoWkqaa bolj qea QkfqaZ OqWqap ql qea fkZftfZsWi Yfqfzak
YlkqWfkaZ fk qeWq fkpqosjakq. 
   Ek qea bfopq YWpa ZaYfZaZ Xy qea Osmoaja rlsoq, fktlitfkd qea
YlkpqosYqflk lb qefp YiWspa, refab FspqfYa IWopeWii pWfZ qeWq W
YlomloWqflk vWp "raoqWfkiy klq W Yfqfzak" fk qea pakpa qeWq qea vloZ fp
spaZ fk qea YiWspa oabaooaZ ql.(96) AkZ fk qea kawq YWpa qea pWja
fiispqoflsp Wsqelofqy eaiZ qeWq W Yfqfzak lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, oapfZfkd
fk Wky OqWqa lb qea Qkflk, fp W Yfqfzak lb qeWq OqWqa.(97) Ek iWqao
YWpap fq eWp Xaak oamaWqaZiy ZaYfZaZ qeWq YlomloWqflkp Woa klq Yfqfzakp
lb qea OqWqa lb qeafo YoaWqflk vfqefk qea jaWkfkd lb qea YiWspa klv
skZao YlkpfZaoWqflk; qeWq qeay Woa YoaWqsoap lb qea ilYWi iWv lb qea
miWYa lb qeafo YoaWqflk, vfqelsq Wky WXplisqa ofdeq ql oaYldkfqflk fk
lqeao OqWqap.(98) 
   A OqWqa pqWqsqa Zakyfkd gsofpZfYfqlk ql qea OqWqa Ylsoqp ltao W psfq
Xy W bloafdk YlomloWqflk WdWfkpq W bloafdk YlomloWqflk eWp Xaak eaiZ klq
ql tfliWqa qefp YiWspa lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk.(99) csq veak W OqWqa iWv
jWZa fq W YlkZfqflk blo qea WZjfppflk lb W bloafdk YlomloWqflk ql Zl
Xspfkapp fk qea OqWqa qeWq qea YlomloWqflkpl WZjfqqaZ vlsiZ WXpqWfk bolj
oajltfkd Wky psfqp Xolsdeq WdWfkpq fq lo lqeaovfpa oaploqfkd ql qea
baZaoWi Ylsoqp, qea YlkZfqflk vWp eaiZ ql Xa tlfZ Wp fk YlkbifYq vfqe
qea rlkpqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. Pefp vWp ZaYfZaZ, elvatao, oWqeao
Wp Wk WXofZdajakq lb qea ofdeqp lb qea YlomloWqflk skZao AjakZjakq TER
qeWk Wp WdWfkpq fqp ofdeq Wp qea Yfqfzak lb Wklqeao OqWqa.(100) 
   A OqWqa iWv WZjfqqfkd W bloafdk YlomloWqflk ql Zl Xspfkapp fk qea
OqWqa lk qea YlkZfqflk qeWq YoaZfqlop vel vaoa oapfZakqp lb qea OqWqa
doWkqfkd qea maojfq pelsiZ eWta moflofqy fk qea ZfpqofXsqflk lb fqp
Wppaqp ltao klkoapfZakq YoaZfqloqf vWp ifhavfpa eaiZ ql tfliWqa qea
YlkpqfqsqflkWi dsWoWkqaa WdWfkpq ZfpYofjfkWqflk.(101) Eq vWp pWfZ, fk
lka lb qea YWpap, qeWq qea lkiy ifjfq lb qea OqWqa'p ofdeq ql awYisZa
bloafdk YlomloWqflkp fp veaoa qeay Woa ajmilyaZ Xy qea BaZaoWi
dltaokjakq lo Woa pqofYqiy akdWdaZ fk fkqaopqWqa lo bloafdk
YljjaoYa.(102) 
   A OqWqa iWv vXfYe fjmlpap W qWw smlk oapfZakq jaoYeWkqp Wq lka oWqa,
WkZ Wklqeao qWw smlk klk-oapfZakqp, blo qea moftfiada lb qoWkpWYqfkd qea
pWja YeWoWYqao lb Xspfkapp, Wq W efdeao lo ZfpYofjfkWqfkd oWqa, fp W
tfliWqflk lb qea moltfpflk va Woa ZfpYsppfkd.(103) 
   Ek plja lb qea YWpap vefYe eWta Xaak ZaYfZaZ qea OqWqa iWv eWp Xaak
WppWfiaZ lk qea ZlsXia dolskZ qeWq fq ZfpYofjfkWqaZ WdWfkpq Yfqfzakp lb
lqeao OqWqap WkZ vWp oadsiWqfta lb fkqaopqWqa YljjaoYa. Pea ZaYfpflkp
oakZaoaZ eWta fk plja fkpqWkYap eaiZ qea iWv ql Xa skYlkpqfqsqflkWi lk
qea iWqqao dolskZ WkZ eWta fdkloaZ qea blojao, Wiqelsde fq vWp
WmmWoakqiy ansWiiy qakWXia.(104) 
   QkZao qea ZaYfpflk fk qea bWjlsp uoaZ OYlqq YWpa W boaa kadol velpa
WkYapqlop vaoa Xolsdeq ql qefp Ylskqoy WkZ pliZ Wp piWtap vWp eaiZ klq
ql Xa W "rfqfzak" fk qea pakpa qeWq qea vloZ vWp spaZ fk qea
rlkpqfqsqflk. cfqqaoiy Wp qefp ZaYfpflk vWp WppWfiaZ Wq qea qfja fq vWp
oakZaoaZ, fqp ildfY vWp skWkpvaoWXia Wp qea iWv qeak pqllZ. Pefp eWp
Xaak YeWkdaZ Xy qea TEEE, TER, WkZ TR AjakZjakqp, WkZ fq eWp Xaak
boansakqiy pWfZ fk qea ZaYfpflkp smlk qelpa WjakZjakqp qeWq qeay vaoa
mWppaZ fk loZao ql oataopa qefp osifkd. 
   Peaoa Woa, elvatao, pskZoy qefkdp YlkYaokfkd vefYe OqWqap jWy
iadfpiWqa ZfpYofjfkWqfkd Xaqvaak oapfZakqp WkZ klkoapfZakqp, Kka lb qea
aWoifapq lb qeapa ZaYfpflkp vWp qeWq jWofqWi ofdeqp lb W pmaYfWi kWqsoa,
XapqlvaZ Xy W OqWqa smlk fqp lvk Yfqfzakp oapfZfkd vfqefk fqp XloZaop,
Zl klq WYosa ql qea klkoapfZakq vfZlv lb W ZaYaWpaZ klkoapfZakq espXWkZ
vel lvkaZ molmaoqy fk qeWq OqWqa. Eq vWp eaiZ qeWq psYe ofdeqp vaoa
WqqWYeaZ ql qea YlkqoWYq lb jWoofWda fk YWpap fk vefYe qea OqWqa
YlkqoliiaZ fq WkZ vaoa klq lb qea YiWpp lb maoplkWi ofdeqp lb W Yfqfzak
fkqakZaZ Xy qefp YiWspa lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk.(105) 
   A OqWqa qWw lk peWoap lb klkoapfZakqp fk W YlomloWqflk lb rlkkaYqfYsq,
lk W XWpfp Zfbbaoakq bolj qeWq lk vefYe oapfZakqp vaoa qWwaZ, vWp, skZao
qea maYsifWo qWw iWvp lb rlkkaYqfYsq, eaiZ klq ql Xa W
ZfpYofjfkWqflk.(106) 
   AkZ W OqWqa iWv pWtfkd qea pqWqsqa lb ifjfqWqflkp ql W oapfZakq
miWfkqfbb WdWfkpq Wk WXpakq ZabakZWkq, Xsq Wiilvfkd fq ql osk WdWfkpq
W klkoapfZakq miWfkqfbb, eWp Xaak eaiZ klq ql ZfpYofjfkWqa WdWfkpq qea
Yfqfzak lb Wklqeao OqWqa vfqefk qea jaWkfkd lb qefp YiWspa. Eq vWp eaiZ
ql Xa W YeWkda lb oajaZy WkZ klq qea ZamoftWqflk lb W ofdeq.(107) 
   Ak WYq lb W OqWqa iadfpiWqsoa doWkqfkd awYispfta moftfiadap blo
qvakqy-bfta yaWop ql jWfkqWfk vfqefk W ZapfdkWqaZ WoaW W
piWsdeqao-elspa, iWkZfkdp blo YWqqia, WkZ yWoZp blo akYilpfkd YWqqia
fkqakZaZ blo pWia lo piWsdXqao, WkZ molefXfqfkd Wii lqeaop, vWp eaiZ ql
Xa vfqefk qea mlifYa mlvao lb qea OqWqa, skWbbaYqaZ Xy qea BaZaoWi
rlkpqfqsqflk lo fqp WjakZjakqp, WkZ ql Xa W oadsiWqflk blo qea eaWiqe
WkZ Yljbloq lb qea malmia.(108) A iWv lb qea OqWqa lb ElvW jWhfkd
maoplkp ifWXia blo Wky ZWjWdap WYYosfkd bolj qeafo Wiilvfkd YWqqia bolj
PawWp ql osk Wq iWoda WkZ pmoaWZ W ZfpaWpa hklvk Wp PawWp batao vWp eaiZ
ql vloh kl ZfpYofjfkWqflk, WkZ ql Xa vfqefk qea mlifYa mlvaop lb qea
OqWqap.(109) A pfjfiWo iWv WdWfkpq fkqolZsYfkd ZfpaWpaZ ifta pqlYh fkql
rliloWZl vWp smeaiZ.(110) Ek qea YWpa lb NWpjsppak t. EZWel,(111) qea
molYiWjWqflk lb qea dltaoklo lb EZWel bloXfZZfkd qea fkqolZsYqflk bolj
lqeao OqWqap lb peaam vfqe pYWX vWp eaiZ ql Xa kl ZfpYofjfkWqflk WdWfkpq
lqeao OqWqap WkZ W iadfqfoWWqa awaoYfpa lb qea mlifYa mlvaop lb qea
OqWqa. 
   OqWqa iWvp bloXfZZfkd klk-oapfZakqp bolj bfpefkd lo eskqfkd vfqefk qea
ifjfqp lb qea OqWqa, lo moapYofXfkd qaojp smlk vefYe qeay vWy Zl pl,
eWta Xaak smeaiZ Wp YlkpqfqsqflkWi, ls qea dolskZ qeWq qea OqWqap katao
psooakZaoaZ ql qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq Wky lb qeafo ofdeqp qlsYefkd
bfpefkd lo efkqfkd; qeWq qea bfpe lo dWja lb qea OqWqa fp W mWoq lb qea
bllZ psmmiy lb qea Yfqfzakp, fk vefYe qea Yfqfzakp lb lqeao OqWqap eWta
kl fkqaoapq lo maoplkWi ofdeqp lo moftfiadap; WkZ qeWq W OqWqa jWy
Ylkqoli qea psXgaYq fk qea awaoYfpa lb fqp mlifYa mlvao,(112) WkZ Wp W
qefkd eaiZ fk qospq blo fqp lvk malmia. 
   Pea nsapqflk lb qea ofdeq lb qea OqWqa ql fkpmaYq jaWq WkZ moltfpflk
WkZ lqeao bllZ psmmifap, WkZ eao ofdeq ql oadsiWqa qea ifnslo qoWbbfY,
fp qea psXgaYq lb W ksjXao lb qea ZaYfpflkp eaoafkWbqao YlkpfZaoaZ, Xsq
fk qelpa YWpap ZaYfZaZ WZtaopaiy ql qea OqWqa qea ZaYfpflk XWp Xaak
miWYaZ afqeao smlk qea fkqaopqWqa YljjaoYa YiWspa lo smlk qea ofdeqp
WppaoqaZ skZao qea TER AjakZjakq, WkZ qeay vfii Xa blskZ skZao qea
ZfpYsppflk lb qea iWqqao psXgaYq. 
 
        Kb qea BaZaoWi CsWoWkqaa lb xwqoWZfqflk lb  
        Bsdfqftap bolj FspqfYa (Nfdeq 42 WXlta). 
 
   LsopsWkq ql qefp lXifdWqflk qea rlkdoapp eWp akWYqaZ pqWqsqap
moltfZfkd blo qea awqoWZfqflk bolj lka OqWqa ql Wklqeao lb bsdfqftap
bolj gspqfYa. Peapa BaZaoWi pqWqsqap Ylkqoli qea ZajWkZ, WkZ pqWqsqap
eWta Xaak mWppaZ fk Wii qea OqWqap moltfZfkd jaWpsoap fk WYYloZWkYa vfqe
qea BaZaoWi iWvp. Ek qea bfopq YWpa lb awqoWZfqflk moapakqaZ ql qea
Osmoaja rlsoq, qea mofplkao vWp fkZfYqaZ fk rWkWZW WkZ oansfpfqflk vWp
jWZa Xy qea rWkWZfWk dltaokjakq lk qea dltaoklo lb Raojlkq, vel
skZaoqllh ql Zaiftao efj. Da WmmifaZ blo W eWXaWp Ylomsp lk qea dolskZ
qeWq psYe W Zaiftaoy YlsiZ lkiy Xa jWZa ql W bloafdk dltaokjakq lk W
oansfpfqflk smlk qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, WkZ qeWq qea QkfqaZ OqWqap vlsiZ
klq, Wp eWZ Xaak pelvk Xy fqp WYqflk fk Wklqeao YWpa, elklo qea
oansfpfqflk XaYWspa qeaoa vWp kl qoaWqy. Pea Raojlkq Ylsoq ZfpjfppaZ qea
vofq, WkZ qea Osmoaja rlsoq, Xy W ZftfZaZ Ylsoq, pspqWfkaZ qea WYqfls
lb qea OqWqa Ylsoq.(113) Ek Wklqeao YWpa fq vWp eaiZ ql Xa qea Zsqy lb
qea dltaoklo lb lka OqWqa, lk qea ZajWkZ lb qea dltaoklo lb Wklqeao
OqWqa, WkZ qea molZsYqflk lb qea fkZfYqjakq, Zsiy YaoqfbfaZ, ql Zaiftao
sm W bsdfqfta bolj gspqfYa; qeWq qea bskYqflk lb qea blojao fp jaoaiy
jfkfpqaofWi, WkZ qeWq ea eWp kl ofdeq ql awaoYfpa Wky ZfpYoaqflkWoy
mlvao; qeWq ea fp skZao jloWi lXifdWqflk ql maobloj qea YljmWYq lb qea
rlkpqfqsqflk, rlkdoapp eWtfkd oadsiWqaZ qea jWkkao lb maoblojWkYa; Xsq
qeWq kl iWv lb rlkdoapp YlsiZ YlaoYa W OqWqa lbbfYao ql maobloj efp
Zsqy, WkZ W jlqflk blo W jWkZWjsp WdWfkpq qea dltaoklo vWp ZakfaZ.(114)
AkZ WdWfk fq vWp eaiZ qeWq qea BaZaoWi pqWqsqa ZajWkZfkd psooakZao lb
W bsdfqfta bolj gspqfYa blskZ fk lka lb qea OqWqap lo Paoofqlofap, ql
qea OqWqa fk vefYe ea pqWkZp WYYspaZ, Wmmifap ql Paoofqlofap Wp vaii Wp
OqWqap WkZ ajXoWYap ataoy lbbakpa hklvk ql qea iWv, fkYisZfkd
jfpZajaWklop.(115) 
   Ek lka YWpa W jWk YeWodaZ vfqe Yofja fk GakqsYhy biaZ ql Sapq
RfodfkfW. A oansfpfqflk fppsaZ blo efj. Sefia qea dltaoklo lb Sapq
RfodfkfW vWp YlkpfZaofkd efp awqoWZfqflk qea jWk vWp pafzaZ fk Sapq
RfodfkfW, bloYfXiy WXZsYqaZ ql GakqsYhy, WkZ qeaoa eaiZ blo qofWi. Da
fkpqfqsqaZ molYaaZfkdp paahfkd ql eWta efjpaib oaqsokaZ ql Sapq
RfodfkfW. Pea Osmoaja rlsoq eaiZ qeWq qeaoa vWp kl jlZa moltfZaZ Xy qea
rlkpqfqsqflk lo iWvp lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, Xy vXfYe BaZaoWi Wsqelofqy
YlsiZ oapqloa efj ql Sapq RfodfkfW.(116) 
   AkZ W bsdfqfta oaqsokaZ ql W ZajWkZfkd OqWqa eWp kl fjjskfqy bolj
lqeao fkZfYqjakqp WdWfkpq efj Xy qea OqWqa bolj vefYe ea biaZ, Wbqao ea
fp oaqsokaZ.(117) csq qea Osmoaja rlsoq eWp pWfZ qeWq ql awqoWZfqa W jWk
lk lka YeWoda WkZ qoy efj lk Wklqeao fp ZfpelooloWXia.(118) Pea dltaoklo
lb W OqWqa, smlk velj ZajWkZ fp jWZa blo qea psooakZao ql Wklqeao OqWqa
lb W Yfqfzak vel fp YeWodaZ vfqe Xafkd W bsdfqfta bolj gspqfYa, jWy
oabspa qea oansfpfqflk fb fq Xa pWqfpbWYqlofiy pelvk ql Xfj qeWq qea
WYYspaZ vWp klq fk qea OqWqa Wq qea qfja qea WiiadaZ lbbakpa vWp
YljjfqqaZ, lo pfkYa, blo fk qeWq YWpa qea bWYq qeWq ea biaZ bolj gspqfYa
fp kadWqftaZ.(119) 
   Bolj qea blskZWqflk lb qea dltaokjao&q WkZ klqvfqepqWkZfud qea
WXplisqa mlvao lb rlkdoapp ql oadsiWqa qea qaojp lb psooakZao lb
bsdfqftap, qea dltaoklop lb OqWqap eWta Xaak ZfpmlpaZ ql pelv
fkZamakZakYa lk qefp psXgaYq lb elklofkd oansfpfqflkp. Ek qea ZWyp lb
piWtaoy fq vWp ZfbbfYWiq ql paYsoa qea psooakZao lb bsdfqfta piWtap, WkZ
fjmlppfXia ql paYsoa qea psooakZao lb maoplkp YeWodaZ fk W piWta OqWqa
vfqe eWtfkd WfZaZ piWtap ql apYWma WkZ eWtfkd qeak qeajpaitap biaZ. Pea
YWpa lb GakqsYhy t. uakkfplk(120) fp Wk fiispqoWqflk fk mlfkq. Ek plja
OqWqap qea awaYsqfta, Xabloa elklofkd qea oansfpfqflk lb qea dltaoklo
lb qea ZajWkZfkd OqWqa, YiWfjp qea ofdeq ql awWjfka qea fkZfYqjakq smlk
vefYe qea ZajWkZ fp XWpaZ, WkZ ql Zaqaojfka veaqeao fq fp fk Zsa bloj,
lo ql ZaYfZa veaqeao fq YeWodap Wk lbbakpa mskfpeWXia skZao qea iWvp lb
qea ZajWkZfkd OqWqa, vefYe fp ansftWiakq ql ZaYfZfkd W Zajsooao ql qea
fkZfYqjakq; WkZ atak ql eaWo qapqfjlky ql Zaqaojfka qea nsapqflk lb
molXWXia dsfiq lo fkklYajYa. A klqWXia fkpqWkYa lb qefp fp qea YWpa lb
W oaYakq dltaoklo, fkZfYqaZ blo YljmifYfqy fk qea jsoZao lb efp
mlifqfYWi oftWi, vel, eWtfkd biaZ bfopq ql lka WkZ qeak ql Wklqeao
OqWqa, vWp ZajWkZaZ Xy qea Wsqelofqfap lb qea OqWqa bolj vefYe ea biaZ,
lb qea Wsqelofqfap lb Xlqe OqWqap fk vefYe ea plsdeq Wpyisj, Xsq eWp
Xaak molqaYqaZ bolj Zaiftaoy. LaoeWmp, fk qea fkpqWkYa YfqaZ, fq vWp
Xapq pl, Xsq qea Xaqqao lmfkflk fp qeWq fb W Yofja fp YeWodaZ WkZ ZajWkZ
fp jWZa, fk Zsa bloj, WYYljmWkfaZ Xy Wk awajmifbfaZ Ylmy lb qea
fkZfYqjakq, qea Zsqy lb qea awaYsqfta smlk velj qea ZajWkZ fp jWZa fp
ql psooakZao qea WYYspaZ ql qea ZajWkZfkd OqWqa, veaqeao ea jWy qefkh
efj molmaoiy lo fjmolmaoiy fkZfYqaZ, fkklYakq lo dsfiqy, iaWtfkd qea
nsapqflkp lb qea psbbfYfakYy lb qea fkZfYqjakq WkZ efp dsfiq lo
fkklYakYa ql Xa ZaqaojfkaZ Xy qea iWvbsiiy YlkpqfqsqaZ WsqXlofqfap lb
qea ZajWkZfkd OqWqa smlk efp qofWi qeaoa.(121) 
 
         Pea CsWoWkqaa ql qea rfqfzak qeWq Laoplkp DaiZ ql 
         OaotfYa lo HWXlo fk Kka OqWqa WkZ xpYWmfkd ql 
         Aklqeao OeWii Jlq Xa ufpYeWodaZ PeaoaXy bolj 
         OsYe OaotfYa lo HWXlo Xsq OeWii Xa uaiftaoaZ Qm. 
         (Nfdeq 43 WXlta). 
 
   Pefp lkYa awYfqfkd YiWspa eWp, pfkYa qea WXlifqflk lb piWtaoy, YaWpaZ
ql mlppapp jsYe moWYqfYWi fjmloqWkYa. Eq jWy Xa iabq, vfqe qea
Wsqelofqfap YfqaZ fk YlkkaYqflk vfqe fq, ql qea pqsZy lb qelpa
fkqaoapqaZ fk qea Ylkqoltaopfap ql vefYe piWtaoy dWta ofpa. 
 
         Kb qea BaZaoWi CsWoWkqaa ql qea rfqfzak qeWq Dfp 
         OqWqa OeWii DWta W NamsXifYWk Bloj lb Cltaokjakq. 
         (Nfdeq 44 WXlta). 
 
   Ek qea bfopq YWpa fk vXfYe qea Osmoaja rlsoq vWp YWiiaZ smlk ql
akbloYa qefp dsWoWkqaa fq ZaYfZaZ qeWq qea nsapqflk vefYe lb qvl oftWi
dltaokjakqp awfpqfkd fk W OqWqa vWp qea iWvbsi dltYokjakq lb qea OqWqa
vWp klq W gsZfYfWi Xsq W mlifqfYWi nsapqflk; qeWq fp, qeWq fq vWp ql Xa
ZaYfZaZ Xy qXa iadfpiWqfta WkZ awaYsqfta ZamWoqjakqp WkZ klq Xy qea
gsZfYfWoy. Pea YWpa Wolpa lsq lb YlkZfqflkp XloZaofkd smlk Yftfi vWo fk
qea OqWqa lb NelZa EpiWkZ fk 1842, oapsiqfkd bolj Wk Wqqajmq lb YaoqWfk
YfqfzakZW lb qeWq OqWqa ql YeWkda qea lodWkfY iWv lb NelZa EpiWkZ bolj
dltaokjakq skZao W YeWoqao doWkqaZ Xy reWoiap EE, vefYe fq eWZ YlkqfksaZ
Wp fqp bloj lb dltaokjakq Wbqao qea Natlisqflk, ql dltaokjakq skZao W
kav Ylkpqfqsqflk boWjaZ Xy qea malmia. Pea qolsXia lofdfkWqaZ fk qea
bWYq qeWq vefia fq vWp WiiadaZ qeWq W jWglofqy lb qea malmia ZapfoaZ W
kav Ylkpqfqsqflk, qeaoa vWp kl moltfpflk fk qea awfpqfkd iWv blo qea
YWiifkd lb Wky Ylktakqflk. Pea YeWoqao dltaokjakq YlkqfksaZ,
klqvfqepqWkZfkd YaoqWfk malmia WppajXiaZ WkZ boWjaZ WkZ WqqajmqaZ ql msq
fkql lmaoWqflk W kav dltaokjakq. Kka uloo vWp Yelpak dltaoklo Xy qea
WZeaoakqp lb qea kav dltaokjakq, WkZ Wq lkYa YWja fk YlkbifYq vfqe qea
liZ oadfja. Pea Zfpmsqa vWp mlmsiWoiy hklvj Wp "uloo'p NaXaiiflk," WkZ
qea pfqsWqflk pllk iaZ ql jfifqWoy YlkbifYq, qea Wooapq, qofWi, WkZ
YlktfYqflk lb uloo, WkZ efp pakqakYa ql fjmofplkjakq blo ifba (Wiqelsde
ea vWp psXpansakqiy mWoZlkaZ). Ek qea awYfqajakq qea BaZaoWi gsZfYfWoy
vWp WmmaWiaZ ql, WkZ ql qea WmmaWi fq dWta qea WXlta oamiy. 
   Pea BaZaoWi awaYsqfta WkZ lqeao ZamWoqjakqp eWZ eaiZ fkqaoYlsopa vfqe
qea liZ dltaokjakq WkZ pl YlkqfksaZ ql oaYldkfza fq, WkZ, Wiqelsde
kafqeao lb qea OqWqa dltaokjakqp YlsiZ, Wp qeay vaoa WZjfkfpqaoaZ qeak,
Xa pWfZ ql Xa W oamsXifYWk dltaokjakq, skZao qea ZaYfpflk qeWq fq vWp
W mlifqfYWi nsapqflk, ql Xa ZfpmlpaZ lb Xy rlkdoapp, qea bWYflkp fk
NelZa EpiWkZ vaoa WiilvaZ ql bilskZao lk, WkZ bfkWiiy skqWkdia qeafo
qolsXiap blo qeajpaitap vfqelsq BaZaoWi fkqaobaoakYa. Ol fk qeWq
fkpqWkYa qefp BaZaoWi dsWoWkqaa lb W oamsXifYWk dltaokjakq moltaZ ql Xa
klq W taoy moWYqfYWi qefkd.(122) 
   Pea kawq lYYWpflk smlk vefYe qea Osmoaja rlsoq YlkpfZaoaZ qefp BaZaoWi
dsWoWkqaa vWp Wbqao qea doaWq rftfi SWo. Pea OqWqa lb PawWp WqqajmqaZ,
fk 1861, ql paYaZa. Dao dltaokjakq WkZ eao malmia vWdaZ vWo lk qea
QkfqaZ OqWqap blo blso yaWop. Ek 1865 pea vWp ltaoYlja Xy bloYa lb Wojp,
WkZ eao qaoofqloy vWp lYYsmfaZ Xy qea jfifqWoy bloYap lb qea QkfqaZ
OqWqap, WkZ eao dltaokjakq vWp qajmloWofiy WZjfkfpqaoaZ Xy moltfpflkWi
Wmmlfkqaap lb qea LoapfZakq lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap WkZ WbqaovWoZp Xy
dltaoklop WmmlfkqaZ skZao Wk WYq lb rlkdoapp, Xy W jfifqWoy YljjWkZao,
PawWp Xafkd W mWoq lb IfifqWoy ufpqofYq Jl. 5, YljmlpaZ lb PawWp WkZ
HlsfpfWkW, msopsWkq ql Wk AYq lb rlkdoapp lb IWoYe, 1867. A OqWqa
Ylktakqflk, WppajXiaZ skZao qea Wsqelofqy lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap fk 1866,
mWppaZ Wk loZfkWkYa illhfkd ql qea oaYltaoy lb YaoqWfk XlkZp WiiadaZ ql
Xailkd ql qea OqWqa, WkZ lka F. S. PeolYhjloqlk, W dltaoklo velj qeWq
Ylktakqflk eWZ aiaYqaZ, WsqelofzaZ qea Xofkdfkd lb qea psfq. Pvl
psXpansakq jfifqWoy dltaoklop, DWjfiqlk WkZ LaWpa, bsoqeao oWqfbfaZ qefp
WYqflk. Pea Xfii vWp Wk lofdfkWi Xfii bfiaZ Xy PawWp Wp W OqWqa fk qea
Osmoaja rlsoq, WkZ vefia qefp YlkZfqflk lb eao pqWqaellZ YlkqfksaZ fq
moWyaZ Wk fkgskYqflk YlkYaokfkd YaoqWfk XlkZp WkZ qeafo Zaiftaoy ql qea
OqWqa. Pea Zabakpa, Wjlkd lqeao qefkdp, nsapqflkaZ: 
   1. Pea Wsqelofqy lb qea mWoqfap kWjaZ ql molpaYsqa W psfq fk qea kWja
lb PawWp. 
   2. Pea ofdeq lb PawWp, Wbqao eao Ylsopa fk qea rftfi SWo, ql psa Wp
W OqWqa lb qea Qkflk. 
   Eq baii ql qea ilq lb refab FspqfYa reWpa ql ZaYfZa qea pqWqsp lb qea
OqWqap vefYe eWZ WqqajmqaZ ql paYaZa, Wbqao qeay vaoa YlknsaoaZ Xy qea
QkfqaZ OqWqap WkZ Xabloa qeay vaoa bsiiy oapqloaZ ql qeafo oaiWqflkp Wp
OqWqap lb qea Qkflk. Ek W doaWq lmfkflk qea bliilvfkd mlfkqp vaoa
ZaYfZaZ: 
   1. PeWq qea qaoj OqWqa, Wp spaZ fk qea rlkpqfqsqflk, jlpq boansakqiy
awmoappap qea YljXfkaZ fZaW lb malmia, qaoofqloy, WkZ dltaokjakq; W
mlifqfYWi Yljjskfqy lb boaa Yfqfzakp, lYYsmyfkd W qaoofqloy lb ZabfkaZ
XlskZWofap, WkZ lodWkfzaZ skZao W dltaokjakq pWkYqflkaZ WkZ ifjfqaZ Xy
W vofqqak Ylkpqfqsqflk, WkZ apqWXifpeaZ Xy qea Ylkpakq lb qea dltaokaZ.
   2. PeWq qea Qkflk lb qeapa OqWqap skZao W Yljjlk rlkpqfqsqflk, blojfkd
W ZfpqfkYq WkZ doaWqao mlifqfYWi skfq, fp qeWq vefYe vWp ZapfdkWqaZ Xy
qea rlkpqfqsqflk Wp qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, WkZ jWZa, lb qea malmia WkZ
OqWqap Yljmlpfkd fq, lka malmia WkZ lka Ylskqoy. 
   3. PeWq qea dsWoWkqaa ql ataoy OqWqa lb W oamsXifYWk bloj lb
dltaokjakq vWp W dsWoWkqaa ql qea malmia lb qeWq OqWqa. 
   4. PeWq qea Qkflk vWp fkZfpplisXia. 
   5. PeWq qea OqWqap kataoqXaiapp mlppappaZ W ofdeq lb paib-dltaojjakq,
pltaoafdkqy, boaaZlj, WkZ fkZamakZakYa, WkZ ataoy mlvao, gsofpZfYqflk,
WkZ ofdeq klq awmoappiy lo Xy bWfo fjmifYWqflk ZaiadWqaZ ql qea Qkflk;
qeWq vfqelsq qea OqWqap fk skflk qeaoa YlsiZ Xa kl psYe mlifqfYWi XlZy
Wp qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. 
   6. PeWq qea moapaotWqflk WkZ qea jWfkqakWkYa lb qeafo dltaokjakqp vWp
Wp jsYe vfqefk qea YWoa lb qea BaZaoWi Wsqelofqy Wp vWp qea moapaotWqflk
lb qea kWqflkWi dltaokjakq fqpaib. 
   7. PeWq qea QkfqaZ OqWqap vWp Wk fkZapqosYqfXia dltaokjakq lb
fkZapqosYqfXia OqWqap. 
   8. PeWq qea dsWoWkqaa lb oamsXifYWk dltaokjakq fk qea Qkflk, ql qea
OqWqa, vWp Wp XfkZfkd lk qea QkfqaZ OqWqap Wp qea dsWoWkqaa lb maomaqsWi
skflk, WkZ qeWq PawWp vWp akqfqiaZ ql qea maoblojWkYa lb qeWq dsWoWkqaa
Xy qea bfkWi WYq veaoaXy pea XaYWja W kav jajXao lb qea Qkflk. 
   9. PeWq eao Wqqajmq Wq paYappflk WkZ Wii WYqp fkqakZaZ ql dfta fq
abbaYq vaoa ksii. 
   10. PeWq qea OqWqa YlkqfksaZ ql awfpq Wp W jajXao lb qea Qkflk,
klqvfqepqWkZfkd fqp qajmloWoy dltaokjakq eWZ Xaak ZapqolyaZ ql moapaota
qea Qkflk. 
   11. PeWq qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, eWtfkd moapaotaZ fqp lvk awfpqakYa, vWp
akdWdaZ fk maoblojfkd fqp ansWiiy pWYoaZ lXifdWqflk ql moltfZa W
oamsXifYWk bloj lb dltaokjakq ql qea OqWqa. 
   12. PeWq qefp vWp W mlifqfYWi dsWoWkqaa ql Xa maoblojaZ Xy qea
rlkdoapp. 
   13. PeWq rlkdoapp vWp ajmlvaoaZ ql gsZda lb qea vWyp WkZ jaWkp lb
WYYljmifpefkd,qeWq oapsiq, WkZ qea moltfpflkWi WkZ qajmloWoy jfifqWoy
dltaokjakqp qeak awfpqfkd vaoa iWvbsi jaWkp ql qeWq akZ fk W YWpa fk
vefYe qea elpqfia OqWqa dltaokjakq eWZ Xaak ZapqolyaZ, WkZ skqfi kav WkZ
ilyWi oamsXifYWk OqWqa dltaokjakqp YlsiZ Xa lodWkfzaZ. 
   14. PeWq fq XaelltaZ qea gsZfYfWoy ql oaYldkfza qea YlkqfksWi
awfpqakYa lb qea paYaZfkd OqWqap Wp jajXaop lb qea Qkflk,
klqvfqepqWkZfkd qea qajmloWoy pspmakpflk lb qeafo oaiWqflkp ql qea Qkflk
Xy qea bloYa lb qea atakqp WXlta oabaooaZ ql. 
   Jl amfqlja lb qefp doaWq ZaYfpflk YWk Zl fq gspqfYa. Eq fp Wjlkd qea
jlpq isjfklsp awmlpfqflkp awqWkq lb qea tfqWi nsapqflkp lb vefYee fq
qoaWqp, WkZ vWp bliilvaZ qeakYabloqe fk ataoy ZamWoqjakq lb qea
dltaokjakq.(123) 
   Ek W iWqao YWpa qea mlfkq vWp jWZa qeWq qea bloj lb dltaokjakq lb W
OqWqa vWp klq oamsXifYWk fk qea pakpa dsWoWkqaaZ Xy qea rlkpqfqsqflk;
qeWq fp ql pWy, qeWq YaoqWfk OqWqa pqWqsqap fk qea boWja WkZ awaYsqflk
vaoa klq. Pea Osmoaja rlsoq oafqaoWqaZ qeWq qea nsapqflk vWp W mlifqfYWi
nsapqflk, WkZ qeWq fb qea "bloj lb dltaokWjakq" awfpqfkd fk W OqWqa vWp
oaYldkfzaZ Xy qea iadfpiWqfta WkZ awaYsqfta ZamWoqjakqp, qea gsZfYfWoy
lsdeq klq ql nsapqflk fq, WkZ jspq bliilv qea fkqaomoaqWqflkp lb qea
OqWqa iWvp miWYaZ lk qeaj Xy qea efdeapq OqWqa Ylsoq.(124) 
   Ek W taoy oaYakq YWpa qea Osmoaja rlsoq, YWiiaZ smlk ql ZaYfZa smlk
qea YWpa lb oftWi YlkqapqWkqp blo qea lbbfYa lb dltaoklo lb W OqWqa,
ZaYifkaZ ql Zl pl, ZaYiWofkd qeWq fq vWp moa-ajfkakqiy W YWpa blo
ZaYfpflk Xy qea Ylsoq lb iWpq oaploq fk qea OqWqa. Seak qea BaZaoWi
dsWoWkqaa lbb W oamsXifYWk bloj lb dltaokvakq, WkZ qea TER AjakZjakq
vaoa fktlhaZ, fq ZfpjfppaZ qea Ylkqakqflk Xy ZaYiWofkd qeWq qea
akbloYajakq lb qeWq dsWoWkqaa vWp fkqospqaZ ql qea mlifqfYWi ZamWoqjakq
lb qea dltaokjakq, WkZ qeWq qea mlvaop lb qea gsZfYfWoy YlkYaokfkd fq
vaoa klq pl akiWodaZ Xy Wkyqefkd fk qea TER AjakZjakq Wp ql dfta qea
Ylsoq mlvao ql oatfav qea gsZdjakq lb W OqWqa Ylsoq lb iWpq oaploq lk
W nsapqflk lb OqWqa aiaYqflkp.(125) 
   Bolj qea bloadlfkd, vefYe ajXoWaa Wii qea sqqaoWkYap lb qea Osmoaja
rlsoq YlkYaokfkd fqp mlvaop skZao qea dsWoWkqaa YiWspa, fq vfii Xa paak
qeWq qea Yfqfzak eWp ifqqia lo klqefkd ql elma blo, fk qea vWy lb fqp
akbloYajakq, bolj qea BaZaoWi gsZfYfWoy. EkZaaZ, gsZdfkd Xy qea oaYakq
sqqaoWkYap lb qeWq Ylsoq, klq lkiy fk qefp oadWoZ, Xsq lk qea psXgaYq
lb awqoWZfqflk,(126) WkZ fk ksjaolsp YWpap veaoa Wqqajmqp eWta Xaak jWZa
ql paYsoa fqp WfZ WdWfkpq dolpp boWsZp qea psbboWda,(127) fq vlsiZ paaj
ql Xa vfiifkd ql psooakZao fqp awfpqakYa WkZ mlvao Wp W YlloZfkWqa
ZamWoqjakq lb qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq, WkZ diWZiy WXWkZlk ql rlkdoapp WkZ
qea awaYsqfta Wii abbloqp ql akbloYa qea iWv, awYamq fk jWqqaop klq
mlifqfYWi. 
   Sa Ylja klv ql YlkpfZao qelpa ofdeqp, moftfiadap, WkZ fjjskfqfap lb
qea Yfqfzak dsWoWkqaaZ Xy qea aWoiy WjakZjakqp ql qea rlkpqfqsqflk. 
 
         Pea Ejjskfqy lb qea rfqfzak AdWfkpq Aky HWv lb 
         rlkdoapp NapmaYqfqfd Wk xpqWXifpejakq lb Naifdflk 
         lo LolefXfqfkd qea Boaa xwaoYfpa Peaoalb. 
         (AjakZjakq E.) 
 
   xfqeao Xy qea Xfii lb ofdeqp, qea Ylkpqfqsqflk, lo qea iWv, lb ataoy
OqWqa lb qea Qkflk, W pfjfiWo dsWoWkqaa fp dftak ql fqp Yfqfzakp,
YlkYaokfkd OqWqa iWvp. Pefp Zlap klq jaWk qeWq qea malmia afqeao lb qea
JWqflk lo lb qea OqWqa eliZ oaifdflk fk Ylkqajmq lo Zapfoa ql Xaifqqia
fq. Kk qea YlkqoWWoy, qea liZapq lb qea Xfiip lb ofdeqp YlkqWfkp
oataoakWqfWi oabaoakYap ql oaifdflk lo qea Zsqy vefYe va lvka ql lso
IWhao. Pea reofpqfWk oaifdflk vWp gsZfYfWiiy ZaYiWoaZ ql Xa W mWoq lb
qea Yljjlk iWv lb LakkpyitWkfW.(128) csq qea xkdifpe xpqWXifpeaZ resoYe
eWZ XaYlja awYaaZfkdiy lXklwflsp ql qea Ylilkfpqp, WkZ qeafo fZaWp lb
oaifdflsp ifXaoqy eWZ Xaak fjXfXaZ bolj usqYe WkZ HsqeaoWk awWjmiap, WkZ
pqfjsiWqaZ Xy veWq qeay oadWoZaZ Wp lmmoappflkp lb qea oadsiWoiy
apqWXifpeaZ resoYe. DakYa qea molefXfqflk WXlta paq bloqe.(129) 
   Pea bfopq YWpa Wofpfkd skZao qefp YiWspa fktlitaZ qea abbaYq lb qea
Ylkpqfqsqflkp, kWqflkWi WkZ OqWqa, WkZ iWvp akWYqaZ qeaoaskZao, smlk
molmaoqy lb qea xmfpYlmWi resoYe fk RfodfkfW. Pea YWpa Wolpa qlsYefkd
YaoqWfk YesoYe molmaoqy fk AiawWkZofW, vefYe Yfqy vWp Wq qeWq qfja fk
qea ufpqofYq lb rlisjXfW. Pea Ylsoq XaiZ qeWq qea oaifdflsp
apqWXifpejakq lb xkdiWkZ vWp WZlmqaZ, pl bWo Wp WmmifYWXia, fk qea
Ylilky lb RfodfkfW, WkZ qeWq qea boaaeliZ lb YesoYe iWkZp vWp fk qea
mWoplk; qeWq iadfpiWqfta doWkqp vaoa fooatlYWXia; qeWq qea AYq lb
RfodfkfW lb 1776, Ylkbfojfkd ql qea xmfpYlmWi resoaX, Wp psYYapplo lb
qea xpqWXifpeaZ resoaX, fqp ofdeqp ql iWkZp, vWp klq YlkqoWoy ql qea
OqWqa Ylkpqfqsqflk WkZ ZfZ klq fkbofkda Wky ofdeqp, Yftfi, mlifqfYWi,
lo oaifdflsp, skZao qea OqWqa Ylkpqfqsqflk; qeWq iWqao WYqp paahfkd ql
Zftapq qea xmfpYlmWi resoYe lb RfodfkfW lb molmaoqy WYnsfoaZ moatflsp
ql qea Natlisqflk vaoa ksii, aqY.(130) cy qefp ZaYfpflk, WkZ lqeaop
pfjfiWo fk lqeao OqWqap, qea xmfpYlmWi resoYe oaqWfkaZ jsYe molmaoqy fk
qea liZao Ylilkfap. 
   Pea Osmoaja rlsoq eWp eaiZ qeWq qea molefXfqflk WXlta Zlap klq jWha
dllZ qea miaW lb W maoplk WYYspaZ lb Wk lbbakpa WdWfkpq jloWifqy WkZ
ZaYakYy, qeWq ea eWp WYqaZ msopsWkq ql qea qakaqp lb efp oaifdflsp
Xaifab, vefYe vaoa qelpa lb W Ilojlk.(131) Eq vWp pWfZ, "Naifdflsp
boaaZlj fp dsWoWkqaaZ ataoyveaoa qeolsdelsq qea QkfqaZ OqWqap pl bWo Wp
YlkdoappflkWi fkqaobaoakYa fp YlkYaokaZ." rlkdoapp vWp ZamoftaZ lb Wii
iadfpiWqfta mlvao ltao jaoa lmfkflk, Xsq vWp iabq boaa ql oaWYe WYqflkp
vefYe vaoa tfliWqfta lb plYfWi Zsqfap lo psXtaopfta lb dllZ loZao.
"LliydWjy eWp WivWyp Xaak lZflsp Wjlkd qea kloqeaok WkZ vapqaok kWqflkp
lb xsolma, WkZ, skqfi qea apqWXifpejakq lb qea Ilojlk resoYe, vWp Wijlpq
awYispftaiy W baWqsoa lb qea ifba lb ApfWqfY WkZ lb AbofYWk malmia.' '
Pea iWv mskfpefkd mliydWjy vWp smeaiZ Wp fkqakZaZ ql moatakq W
maokfYflsp moWYqfYa, kl jWqqao veWq vWp qea Xaifab lb qea mWoqy akdWdfkd
fk fq Pea lmfkflk ZaiftaoaZ Xy refab FspqfYa SWfqa fp Xlqe fkqaoapqfkd
WkZ fkpqosYqfta WkZ ansWiiy WmmifYWXia ql lqeao oaifdflsp fjjloWifqfap
qeWk mliydWjy. 
   Ek W iWqao YWpa qea Osmoaja rlsoq ZaYiWoaZ qeWq XfdWjy WkZ mliydWjy
Woa Yofjap Xy qea iWvp lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, Xy qea iWvp lb EZWel, WkZ
Xy qea iWvp lb Wii YftfifzaZ WkZ reofpqfWk Ylskqofap; WkZ ql YWii qeafo
WZtlYWYy W qakaq lb oaifdflk fp ql lbbakZ qea Yljjlk pakpa lb jWkhfkZ;
qeWq W Yofja fp klka qea iapp psYe, klo iapp lZfljp, XaYWspa pWkYqflkaZ
Xy veWq Wky mWoqfYsiWo paYq jWy ZapfdkWqa Wp oaifdflk; WkZ qeWq qea
bfopq WjakZjakq ql qea rlkpqfqsqflk vWp katao fkqakZaZ Wp W molqaYqflk
bolj mskfpejakq blo WYqp fkfjfYWi ql qea maWYa, dllZ loZao, WkZ jloWip
lb plYfaqy.(132) 
   ik W YWpa oaYakqiy ZaYfZaZ, fq vWp eaiZ qeWq miWYfkd Wk fpliWqaZ
elpmfqWi XsfiZfkd Xsfiq Xy qea dltaokjakq fk YeWoda lb Wklqeao elpmfqWi,
vefYe vWp skZao qea Ylkqoli lb Ofpqaop lb qea NljWk rWqelifY resoYe, vWp
klq lXklwflsp ql qea YlkpqfqsqflkWi molefXfqflk WdWfkpq iWvp oapmaYqfkd
Wk apqWXifpejakq lb oaifdflk.(133) 
 
         Kb qea Nfdeq lb qea rfqfzak ql Boaa OmaaYe.  
         (AjakZjakq E.) 
 
   Pefp ofdeq fp Wipl dsWoWfkqaaZ ql qeafo Yfqfzakp Xy Wii qea OqWqap.
Kb fq, fq fp psbbfYfakq ql pWy qeWq fq fp W ofdeq ql Xa YlkbfkaZ vfqefk
qea XlskZp lb ZaYakYy WkZ jloWifqy, WkZ dftap jl fjjskfqy bolj Wooapq
WkZ mskf-p@akq blo qoaWplkWXia, paZfqflsp, WkZ fkbiWjjWqloy WmmaWip. Ek
qfja lb vWo ksjaolsp Wooapqp eWta Xaak jWZa Xy 'qea Wsqelofqy lb
jfifqWoy Yljjfppflkp, WsZ Yfqfzakp eWta Xaak WYqsWiiy ZamloqaZ Xy
moapfZakqfWi loZaop vfqelsq qofWi Xy gsoy, WkZ Wbqao tWfkiy paahfkd
oaZoapp skZao eWXaWp Ylomsp molYaaZfkdp.(134) AkZ fk qfja lb maWaa,
skZao BaZaoWi pqWqsqap Wsqelofzfkd qea ZamloqWqflk lb WkWoYefpqp,
maoplkp eWta, bolj qfja ql qfja, Xaak fkZfYqaZ, WooapqaZ, WkZ mskfpeaZ
lo ZamloqaZ, blo paZfqflsp, WkWoYefpqfY, WkZ kfefifpqfY sqqaoWkYap WkZ
msXifYWqflkp. 
   Pea gspqfbfYWqflk blo psYe WYqflk fp qeWq vefia qea Ylkpqfqsqflkp,
BaZaoWi WkZ OqWqa, dsWoWkqaa boaaZlj lb pmaaYe WkZ lb qea moapp, qea
maoplkp pl pmaWhfkd lo msXifpefkd Woa WkpvaoWXia ql qea msXifY
Wsqelofqfap blo qeafo WYqp fk qea fkqaoapqp lb dllZ Yfqfzakpefm,
jloWifqy, WkZ ZaYakYy.(135) 
 
 
                Kb qea BoaaZlj lb qea Loapp.  
             (AjakZjakq E.) 
 
   Pea boaaZlj lb qea moaWp eWp Xaak ZapYofXaZ Wp lka lb qea doaWq
XsivWohp lb ifXaoqy. QknsapqflkWXiy qea psmmoappflk lb bWfo ZfpYsppflk
lb msXifY jaWpsoap fk qea moapp vWp, skZao qea pypqaj WdWfkpq vefYe qea
Ylilkfpqp oaXaiiaZ, lka lb qea jlpq lZflsp blojp lb qyoWkky. Kk qea
lqeao eWkZ, qelpa vel, fk qeWq ZWy, vaoa pl WoZakq blo qea WXplisqa
ifXaoqy lb qea moapp YlsiZ klq eWta bloapaak qea fjjakpa fkYoaWpa fk
msXifY WkZ moftWqa mofkqaZ jWqqao vefYe vWp ql lYYso; qea Wijlpq
skifjfqaZ mlvao blo dllZ lo atfi vefYe qea moapp vWp ql mlppapp; qea
fooamWoWXia kWqsoa lb qea fkgsofap vefYe fq fp lbqak WXia ql fkbifYq;
lo qea fooapmlkpfXia eWkZp fkql vefYe pl iWoda W mloqflk lb qea moapp
lb lso ZWy vWp, fk qfja, ql mWpp.(136) 
   Pea OqWqa Ylkpqfqsqflkp WkZ pqWqsqap vefYe dsWoWkqaa qea boaaZlj lb
qea moapp, blo qea jlpq mWoq, Ylsmia vfqe qeWq dsWoWkqaa qea YlkZfqflk
qeWq qea maoplkp pl mofkqfkd peWii Xa WkpvaoWXia fk ZWjWdap blo Wky
WXspa lb qea moftfiada. csq qea moftfiada fqpaib fp oadWoZaZ Wp lb psYe
Zfdkfqy WkZ pWkYqfqy qeWq qea Ylsoqp lb pskZoy OqWqap eWta eaiZ qeWq Wk
fkgskYqflk vfii klq ifa ql oapqoWfk qea msXifYWqflk lb Wk WiiadaZ ifXai,
WkZ qea lkiy oaZoapp lb W mWoqy ifXaiaZ fp ql Xofkd Wk WYqflk blo
ZWjWdap Wbqao qea bWYq lo molpaYsqa qea lbbakZao YofjfkWiiy.(137) 
 
             Nfdeqp CsWoWkqaaZ Xy AjakZjakqp EE - REEE, 
             TE, WkZ TEE. 
 
   Kb qea lqeao ofdeqp dsWoWkqaaZ Xy qea WjakZjakqp bolj EE ql REEE va
peWii klq pmaWh fk ZaqWfi, XaYWspa qeafo kWqsoa, awqakq, WkZ bsii
fkqaomoaqWqflk vfii Xa blskZ psbbfYfakqiy YlkpfZaoaZ fk qea Wsqelofqfap
YfqaZ fk YlkkaYqflk vfqe qeafo pqWqajakq.(138) Jlo Zl qea WjakZjakqp
ksjXaoaZ TE WkZ TEE XaWo ZfoaYqiy lk lso psXgaYq.  
   DWtfkd klv Ylja ql qea vWo WjakZjakqp, iaq sp molYaaZ ql YlkpfZao qeaj
fk qeafo loZao. 
 
(1) colWZeaWZ'p Dfpqloy lb Jav Uloh, 1770. 
(2) "Pea moWYqfYa lb paqqfkd WmWoq paYqflk Jl. 16 lb ataoy qlvkpefm lb
msXifY iWkZp, blo qea jWfkqakWkYa lb msXifY pYellip fp qoaWYaWXia ql qea
loZfkWkYap lb 1785, Xafkd qea bfopq akWYqjakq blo qea ZfpmlpWi Xy pWia
lb qea msXifY iWkZp fk qea vapqaok qaoofqloy. Pea WmmolmofWqflk lb
msXifY iWkZp blo qeWq lXgaYq XaYWja W bskZWjakqWi mofkYfmia Xy qea
loZfkWkYa lb 1787, vefYe paqqiaZ qaojp lb YljmWYq Xaqvaak qea malmia WkZ
OqWqap lb qea kloqevapqaok qaoofqloy, WkZ qea lofdfkWi OqWqap,
skWiqaoWXia awYamq Xy Ylkpakq. Kka lb qea WoqfYEap WbbfojaZ qeWq
`oaifdflk, jloWifqy, WkZ hklviaZda, Xafkd kaYYappWoy blo dllZ dltaokjakq
WkZ qea eWmmfkapp lb jWkhfkZ.' WkZ loZWfkaZ qeWq 'pYellip. WkZ qea jaWkp
lq aZsYWqflk, pelsiZ Xa bloatao akYlsoWdaZ.' Pefp mofWYfmia vWp
awqakZaZ, bfopq Xy YlkdoappflkWi akkWYqjakq (1 OqWq. Wq iWoda, 550,
mWoW. 6), WkZ WbqaovWoZ, fk 1802, Xy YljmWYq Xaqvaak qea QkfqaZ OqWqap
WkZ CalodfW, ql qea plsqevapqaok qaoofqloy. Pea aWoifapq Zatailmjakq lb
qefp WoqfYia fk moWYqfYWi iadfpiWqflk, fp ql Xa blskZ fk qea
lodWkfzWqflk lb qea pqWqa lb Kefl, WkZ qea WZgspqjakq lb fqp Yftfi
mlifqy, WYYloZfkd ql qea loZfkWkYa. moamWoWqloy ql fqp WZjfppflk ql qea
Qkflk." rllmao t. NlXaoqp, (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 177. 
(3) Ol maopsWpfta lb Wii lso aWoiy WYqp vaoa qea awWjmiap li qea usqYe
qeWq atak lso kWqflkWi ajXiaj fp pfkdsiWoiy ifha qea biWd lb qea QkfqaZ
JaqeaoiWkZp. 
(4) rlobfaiZ R. rloyaii. (1823) 4 SWpe. Q.O. 371. Oaa Wipl SWoZ t.
IWoyiWkZ, (1870) 12 SWii. Q.O. 430. 
(5) 16 SWii Q.O. 76. 
   "Pea rlkpqfqsqflk Zlap klq Zabfka qea moftfiadap WkZ fjjskfqfap lb
Yfqfzakp. Blo qeWq Zabfkfqflk va jspq illh aipaveaoa." Ifklo t.
DWmmaopaqq, (1874) 21 SWii. Q.O. 170. 
(6) NatfpaZ rlZa lb RfodfkfW, 1819, Rli. 1. mWda 31. 
(7) "Pea rlkbaZaoWqflk vWp W iaWdsa lb bofakZpefm lb qea OqWqap vfqe
aWYe lqeao, pl ZaYiWoaZ fk qea WoqfYiap WkZ akqaoaZ fkql `blo qeafo
Yljjlk Zabakpa, qea paYsofqy lb qeafo ifXaoqfap, WkZ qeafo jsqsWi WsZ
dakaoWi vaibWoa, XfkZfkd qeajpaitap ql Wppfpq aWYe lqeao WdWfkpq Wii
bloYa lbbaoaZ ql lo WqqWYhp jWZa smlk qeaj, lo Wky lb qeaj, lk WYYlskq
lb oaifdflk. pltaoafdkqy, qoWZa. lo Wky lqXao moaqakpa veWqatao.' csq
fqp WoqfYiap ZfZ klq bloj W Ylkpqfqsqflk lo loZfkWkYa lb dltaokjakq,
vfqe mlvao ql akbloYa fqp moltfpflkp smlk aWYe lqeao, lo atak W YljmjWYq
eWtfkd Wky YleaoakYa lo XfkZfkd bloYa lqeao qeWk qeWq lb W iaWdsa lb
bofakZpefm, vefYe fqp jajXaop lkiy YiWfjaZ qeaj ql Ylkpqfqsqa." SeWoqlk
t. Sfpa. (1894) 153 Q.O. 167.  
(8) "A oaWplkWXia fkqaomoaqWqflk lb qeWq fkpqosjakq [qea BaZaoWi
rlkpqfqsqflk] kaYappWofiy iaWZp ql qea YlkYispflk qeWq qea mlvaop pl
doWkqaZ Woa katao awYispfta lb pfjfiWo mlvaop awfpqfkd fk qea OqWqap,
skiapp veaoa qea rlkpqfqsqflk eWp awmoappiy. fk qaojp, dftak Wk
awYispfta mlvao ql rlkdoapp, lo qea awaoYfpa lb W ifha mlvao fp
molefXfqaZ ql qea OqWqap, lo qeaoa fp W ZfoaYq oamsdsWkYy lo
fkYljmWqfXfifqy fk qea awaoYfpa lb fq Xy qea OqWqap. Pea awWjmia lb qea
bfopq YiWfj fp ql Xa blskZ Ek qea awYispfta iadfpiWqflk ZaiadWqaZ ql
rlkdoapp ltao miWYap msoYeWpaZ Xy qea Ylpakq lb qea iadfpiWqsoa lb qea
OqWqa fk vefYe qea pWja peWii Xa, blo bloqp, WopakWip, ZlYh-yWoZp, aqY.;
lb qea paYlkZ YiWfj, qea molefXfqflk lb W OqWqa ql Ylfk jlkay lo ajfq
Xfiip lb YoaZfq; lb qea qefoZ YiWpp, Wp qefp Ylsoq eWta WioaWZy eaiZ,
qea mlvao ql apqWXifpe Wk skfbloj osia lb kWqsoWifzWqflk, WkZ qea
ZaiadWqflk lb WZjfofifqy WkZ jWofqfja gsofpZfYqflk. Ek Wii lqeao YWpap
klq bWiifkd vfqefk qea YiWppap WioaWZy jakqflkaZ, fq paajp
sknsapqflkWXia qeWq qea OqWqap oaqWfk YlkYsooakq Wsqelofqy vfqe
rlkdoapp, klq lkiy smlk qea iWqqao WkZ pmfofq lb qea xiatakqe AjakZjakq
lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk, Xsq, smlk qea plssZapq mofkYfmiap lb dakaoWi
oaWplkfkd. Peaoa fp qefp oapaota, elvatao, qeWq fk YWpap lb YlkYsooakq
Wsqelofqy, veaoa qea iWvp lb qea OqWqap WkZ lb qea Qkflk Woa fk ZfoaYq
WkZ jWkfbapq Yliifpflk lk qea pWja psXgaYq,  qelpa lb qea Qkflk, Xafkd
'qea psmoaja iWv lb qel iWkZ,' Woa lb mWoWjlskq Wsqelofqy, WkZ qea OqWqa
iWvp, pl bWo, WkZ pl bWo lkiy, Wp psYe fkYljmWqfXfifqy awfpqp, jspq
kaYappWofiy yfaiZ." Dlspqlk t. Illoa, (1820) 5 SeaWq. Q.O. 49. Oaa Wipl
I'rsiilYe t. IWoyiWkZ, (1819) 4 SeaWq. Q.O. 406; rleak t. RfodfkfW,
(1821) 6 SeaWq Q.O. 414; AXiajWk v. cllqe, (1858) 21 Dlv. Q.O. 516; 
HadWi PakZao rWpap, (1870) 12 SWii. Q.O. 543; PWoXia'p rWpa, (1871) 13
SWii. Q.O. 406; xw m. OfaXliZ. (1879) 100 Q. O. 398; refkapa xwYispflk
rWpa, (1889) 130 Q.O. 604; Ep oa MsWoiap, (1895) 158 Q.O. 535. 
(9) rftfi Nfdeqp rWpap, (1883 109 Q.O. 3. 
(10) "A OqWqa eWp qea pWja skZakfWXia WkZ skifjfqaZ gsofpZfYqflk ltao
Wii maoplkp WkZ qefkdp vfqefk fqp qaoofqlofWi ifjfqp, Wp Wky bloafdk
kWqflk, veaoa qeWq gsofpZfYqflk fp klq psooakZaoaZ lo oaqWfkaZ Xy qea
rlkpqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. cy tfoqsa lb qefp, fq fp klq lkiy qea
ofdeq, Xsq qea XlskZiapp WkZ pliajk Zsqy lb W OqWqa, ql WZtWkYa qea
pWbaqy. eWmmfkapp, WkZ molpmaofqy lb fqp malmia, WkZ ql moltfZa blo fqp
dakaoWi vaibWoa, Xy Wky WkZ ataoy WYq lb iadfpiWqflk vefYe fq jWy Zaaj
ql Xa YlkZsYfta ql qeapa akZp, veaoa qea mlvao ltao qea mWoqfYsiWo
psXgaYq, lo qea jWkkao lb fqp awaoYfpa fp klq psooakZaoaZ lo oapqoWfkaZ
fk qea jWkkao gspq pqWqaZ. Aii qelpa mlvaop vefYe oaiWqa ql jaoaiy
jskfYfmWi iadfpiWqflk, lo veWq jWy, maoeWmp, jloa molmaoiy Xa YWiiaZ
`fkqaokWi mlifYa,' Woa klq qesp psooakZaoaZ lo oapqoWfkaZ; WkZ
Ylkpansakqiy, fk oaiWqflk ql qeapa, qea Wsqelofqy lb qea OqWqa fp
Yljmiaqa, sknsWifbfaZ, WkZ awYispfta." Jav Uloh t. IfiW, (1837) 11Laq.
Q.O. 139. 
   "clqe qea OqWqap WkZ qea QkfqaZ OqWqap awfpqaZ Xabloa qea
rlkpqfqsqflk. Pea malmia, qeolsde qeWq fkpqosjakq, apqWXifpeaZ W jloa
maobaYq skflk Xy psXpqfqsqfkd W kWqflkWi dltaokjakq, WYqfkd, vfqe Wjmia
mlvao, ZfoaYqiy smlk qea Yfqfzakp, fkpqaWZ lb qea YlkbaZaoWqa
dltaokjakq, vefYe WYqaZ, vfqe mlvaop doaWqiy oapqofYqaZ, lkiy smlk qea
OqWqap. csq fk jWky WoqfYiap lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk qea kaYappWoy awfpqakYa
lb qea OqWqap, WkZ, vfqefk qeafo molmao pmeaoap, qea fkZamakZakq
Wsqelofqy lb qea OqWqap, fp ZfpqfkYqiy oaYldkfzaZ. Pl qeaj kaWoiy qea
velia YeWoda lb fkqaoflo oadsiWqflk fp YljjfqqaZ lo iabq; ql qeaj WkZ
ql qea malmia Wii mlvaop klq awmoappiy ZaiadWqaZ ql qea kWqflkWi
dltaokjakq Woa oapaotaZ. Pea dakaoWi YlkZfqflk vWp vaii pqWqaZ Xy Io.
IWZfplk fk Pea BaZaoWifpq, qesp: `Pea BaZaoWi WkZ OqWqa dltaokjakqp Woa
fk bWYq Xsq Zfbbaoakq Wdakqp WkZ qospqaap lb qea malmia, YlkpqfqsqaZ
vfqe Zfbbaoakq mlvaop WkZ ZapfdkWqaZ blo Zfbbaoakq msomlpap'" HWka
rlskqy t. Koadlk, (1868) 7SWii. Q.O. 76. 
(11) QkZao qea taoy maYsifWo Ylkpqfqsqflk lb qefp dltaokjakq, Wiqelsde
qea Yfqfzakp lva psmoaja WiiadfWkYa ql qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq, qeay lva
Wipl W nsWifbfaZ WiiadfWkYa ql qea OqWqa fk vefYe qeay Woa ZljfYfiaZ.
Peafo maoplkp WkZ molmaoqy Woa psXgaYq ql fqp iWvp. Pea cofd Aojy
SWovfYh, (1862) 2 ciWYh Q.O. 673. 
(12) xw m. UWoXolsde. (1884) 110 Q.O. 651; fk oa Coaak, (1890) 134 Q.O.
377; IYLeaoplk t. ciWYhao, (1892) 146 Q.O. 1; Sfiay t. Ofkhiao, (1900)
179 Q.O. 58; OvWbloZ t. Pajmiaqlk,. (1902) 185 Q.O. 487.  
    "Pea ofdeq ql tlqa blo jajXaop lb qea rlkdoapp lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap
fp klq ZaoftaZ jaoaiy bolj qea Ylkpqfqsqflk WkZ iWvp lb qea OqWqa fk
vefYe qeay Woa Yelpak, Xsq eWp fqp blskZWqfls fk qea rlkpqfqsqflk lb qea
QkfqaZ OqWqap." Sfiay t. Ofkhiao (1900) 179 Q.O. 58, Wmmoltfkd xw
m.UWoXolsde, (1884) 110 Q.O. 651. 
(13) uoaZ OYlqq t. OWkZbloZ, (1856) 19 Dlv. Q.O. 393; RaWzfa cWkh t.
Bakkl, (1869) 8 SWii. Q.O. 533; OYeliay R. Nav, (1874) 23 SWii. Q.O.
331; ua Poatfiia t. OjWiip, (1878) 98 Q.O. 517; CfXXlkp t. ufpqofYq lb
rlisjXfW, (1886) 116 Q.O. 404; LliilYh t. BWojaop' H & P. rl., (1895)
157 Q.O. 429; LliilYh t. BWojaop' H. & P. rl., 158 Q.O. 601; PeljWp t.
Q.O, (1904) 192 Q. O. 363. 
Oaa fkboW klqa 9, L. 114. 
   "Pea jak vel boWjaZ WkZ WZlmqaZ qeWq fkpqosjakq [qea rlkpqfqsqflki eWZ
gspq ajaodaZ bolj qea pqosddia blo fkZamakZakYa, velpa oWiiyfkd Yoy eWZ
Xaak qeWq `qWwWqflk WkZ oamoapakqWqflk dl qldaqeao'....Pea OqWqap vaoa
WXlsq, blo Wii kWqflkWi msomlpap ajXoWYaZ fk qea rlkpqfqsqflk, ql XaYlja
lka, skfqaZ skZao qea pWja iWvp. csq Wp qeay pqfii oaqWfkaZ qeafo
gsofpZfYqflk ltao Wii maoplkp WkZ qefkdpvfqefk qeafo qaoofqlofWi ifjfqp,
awYamq veaoa psooakZaoaZ ql qea dakaoWi dltaokjakq lo oapqoWfkaZXy qea
rlkpqfqsqflk, qeay vaoa YWoabsi ql paa ql fq qeWq qWwWqflk WkZ
oamoapakqWqflk pelsiZ dl qldaqeao, pl qeWq qea plXaoafdkqy oapaotaZ
pelsiZ klq Xa fjmWfoaZ, WkZ qeWq veak rlkdoapp, WkZ apmaYfWiiy qea Dlspa
lb NamoapakqWqftap, veaoa fq vWp pmaYfbfYWiiy moltfZaZ qeWq Wii oataksa
Xfiip jspq lofdfkWqa, tlqaZ W qWw smlk molmaoqy, fq pelsiZ Xa vfqe qea
YlkpYflspkapp, WkZ skZao qea oapmlkpfXfifqy, qeWq fk pl Zlfkd qea qWw
pl tlqaZ vlsiZ molmloqflkWqaiy smlk qea fjjaZfWqa Ylkpqfqsakqp lb qelpa
vel fjmlpaZ fq." LliilYh t. BWojaop' H.& P.rl., (1895) 157 Q.O. 429. 
(14) "Pea ZfoaYq WkZ ZaYiWoaZ lXgaYq lb qefp Yakpsp fp, ql bsokfpe W
pqWkZWoZ Xy vefYe `oamopakqWqftap, WkZ ZfoaYq qWwap, jWy Xa WmmloqflkaZ
Wjlkd qea pataoWi OqWqap vefYe jWy Xa fkYisZaZ vfqefk qefp Qkflk.'"
HlsdeXlolsde t. ciWha, (1820) 5 SeaWq. Q.O. 317. 
(15) "Pea Dlspa lb NamoapakqWqftap eWp qea plia ofdeq ql fjmaWYe
lbbfYaop lb qea dltaokjakq. WkZ qea OasWql ql qoy qfjj." GfiXlsok t.
Peljmplk, (1880) 103 Q.O.190. 
(16) AkZaoplk t.uskk, (1821) 6 SeaWq. Q.O. 204; rlwa t. IriakWYeWk,
(1798) 3 uWii. Q.O. 478; GfiXlsok t. Peljmplk, (1880) 103 Q.O. 168. 
(17) BfaiZ t.riWoh, (1802) 143 Q.O. 649; Pvfk rfqy cWkh t. JaXahao
(1897) 167 Q.O. 196. 
   "Pea YlkpqosYqflk lb qefp ifjfqWqflk fp moWYqfYWiiy vaii paqqiaZ Xy
qea skfbloj WYqflk lb rlkdoapp. AYYloZfkd ql qeWq YlkpqosYqflk, fq eWp
Xaak YlkbfkaZ ql Xfiip ql iaty qWwap fk qea pqofYq pakpa lb qea vloZp,
WkZ eWp klq Xaak skZaopqllZ ql awqakZ ql Xfiip blo lqeao msomlpap vefYe
fkYfZakqWiiy YoaWqa oataksa.'" Q.O. t. Jloqlk, (1875) 1 Q.O. 569; Pvfk
rfqy cWkh t. JaXahao, (1897) 167 Q.O. 202. 
(18) BfaiZ t. riWoh (1892) 143 Q.O. 649; Q.O. t. cWiifk (1892) 144 Q.O.
1; Pvfk rfqy cWkh t. JaXahao (1897) 167 Q. O. 196; HW AXoW Ofitao Ifk.
rl. t. Q. O., (1899) 176 Q. O. 423; Sfihap rlskqy t. rliao, (1901) 180
Q.O. 506; Blsoqaak ufWjlkZ Nfkdp t. Q.O. (1901) 183 Q. O. 176. 
   "Pea msomlpa lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk fp ql paYsoa ql qea malmia lb qefp
Ylskqoy qea Xapq iadfpiWqflk Xy qea pfjmiaWq jaWkp. Eqp boWjaop Xafkd
jfkZbsi lb qea aoolop WkZ ltaopfdeqp vefYe Woa XoaZ fk qea eaWq WkZ
pqofba WkZ ZftfZaZ oapmlkpfXfifqy lb iadfpiWqfta WppajXifap, WkZ vefYe
qeay eWZ oamaWqaZiy XaeaiZ fk OqWqa iadfpiWqsoap, ZaqaojfkaZ ql paYsoa
ql qea malmia qea Xakabfqp lb oatfpflk. WkZ ql skfqa vfqe qea mlvao lb
oatfpflk qea YeaYh lb skZftfZaZ oapmlkpfXfifqy, WkZ ql miWYa qea mlvao
fk qea eWsZp lb qea maoplk fk velj qea kWqflk oamlpaZ, blo qea qfja
Xafkd. qea jlpq YlkbfZakYa" Q.O. t. Saii, (1894) 29 rq. ri. 540. 
(19) Dyiqlk t. Q.O. (1796) 3 uWii. Q.O. 171; I'rsiilYe t. IWoyiWkZ,
(1819) 4 SXaWq. Q.O. 316; HlsdeXlolsde t. ciWha, (1820) 5 SeaWq. Q.O.
317; KXXlok t. Q. O. cWkh (1824) 9 SeaWq. Q.O. 738; Sapqlk v.
reWoiapqlk, (1829) 2 Laq. Q.O. 449; ulXXfkp t. xofa rlskqy, (1842) 16
Laq. Q.O. 435; Pesoilv t. IWppWYespaqqp, (1947) 5 Dlv. Q.O. 504; rlliay
t. clWoZ lb SWoZakp, (1851) 12 Dlv. Q.O. 299; IYCsfoa t. IWppWYespaqqp,
(1865) 3 SWii. Q.O. 387; RWk Aiiak t. Appapplop, (1865) 3 SWii. Q.O.
573; coWZiay t. Lalmia, (1866) 4 SWii. Q.O. 459; HfYakpa PWw rWpap
(1866) 5 SWii. Q.O. 462; LaotaWo v. IWppWYespaqqp. (1866) 5 SWii. Q.O.
475; SllZosbb t. LWqeWj, (1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 123; Dfkplk t. Hlqq, (1868)
8 SWii. Q.O. 148; RaWzfa cWkh t. Bakkl, (1869) 8 SWii. Q.O. 633;
rliiaYqlo t. uWy, (1870) 11 SWii. Q.O. 113; Q.O. t. Ofkdao, (1872) 15
SWii. Q.O. 111; OqWqa PWw lk Bloafdk-eaiZ clkZp, (1872) 15 SWii. Q.O.
300; Q.O. t. cWiqfjoa, aqY., N. rl., (1872) 17 SWii Q.O. 322; Qkflk LWY.
N. rl. t. Lakfpqlk, (1873) 18 SWii. Q.O. 5; OYeliay t. Nlv, (1874) 23
SWii. Q.O. 331; IaoYeWkqp JWq. cWkh t. Q.O. (1879) 101 Q. O. 1; Omofkdao
t. Q.O. (1881) 102 Q.O. 592; HadWi PakZao rWpap, (1884) 110 Q.O. 421;
DaWZ Ilkay rWpap (1884) 112 Q.O. 680; RWk colYhifk t. Pakkappaa 117 Q.O.
151; BfaiZ v. riWoh, (1892) 143 Q. O. 649. Jav Uloh, aqY., N. rl. t.
LakkpyitWkfW, (1894) 153 Q.O. 628; LliiWYh  t. BWojaop' H. & P. rl.,
(1895) 157 Q.O. 429; Q.O. t. NaWiqy rl., (1896) 163 Q.O. 427; Ek oa
GliilYh, (1807) 165 Q.O. 526; JfYli t. Ajap, (1899) 173 Q.O. 509;
Gklviqlk t. Illoa, (1900) 178 Q.O. 41; uaifjW t. cfZvaii, (1901) 182
Q.O. 1; ulliay t. Q.O. (1901) 182 Q.O. 222; Blsoqaak ufWjlkZ Nfkdp t.
Q.O. (1901) 183 Q.O. 176; BaipakXaiZ t. Q.O., (1902) 186 Q.O. 126;
PeljWp t. Q.O. (1904) 192 Q.O. 363. Oaa psmoW, klqa 3, m. 112. 
(20) CfXXlkp t. KdZak, (1824) 9 SeaWq. Q.O. 1; colvk t. IWoyiWkZ (1827)
12 SeaWq Q.O. 419; Sfiiplk v. ciWYh cfoZ roaah IWope rl., (1829) 2 Laq.
Q.O. 245; SloYapqao t. CalodfW, (1832) 6 Laq. Q.O. 515; Jav Uloh t.
Ifik, (1837) 11 Laq. Q.O. 102; Q. O. t. rlljXp, (1838) 12 Laq. Q.O. 72;
Dlijap t. Fakkfplk, (1840) 14 Laq. Q.O. 640; Pesoilv t. IWppWYespaqqW,
(1847) 5 Dlv. Q.O. 604; Ojfqe t. Psokao, (1849) 7 Dlv. Q.O. 283; JWqeWk
t. HlsfpfWkW (1850) 8 Dlv. Q.O. 73; IWdao t. CofjW (1850) 8 Dlv. Q.O.
490; Q. O. t. IWofdliZ. (1850) 9 Dlv. Q.O. 560; rlliay t. clWoZ lb
SWoZakp, (1851) 12 Dlv. Q.O. 299; Pea Lolmaiiao Cakapaa refab t.
Bfqzesde, (1851) 12 Dlv. Q.O. 443; LakkpyitWkfW t. Seaaifkd, aqY.,
cofZda rl., (1851) 13 Dlv. Q.O. 518; RaWzfa t. Illoa, (1862) 14 Dlv.
Q.O. 568; Ojfqe t. IWoyiWkZ, (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 71; LakkpyitWkfW t.
Seaaifkd. aqY., cofZda rl., (1853) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 421; Ofkklq t. uWtakmloq
(1859) 22 Dlv. Q.O. 227; Blpqao t. uWtakmloq. (1859) 22 Dlv. Q.O. 244;
rlkvWy t. PWyilo(1861) 1 ciWYh Q.O. 603; Q.O. t. DliifZWy, (1865) 3
SWii. Q.O. 407; CfijWk t. LefiWZaimefW (1865) 3 SWii. Q.O. 713; Pea
LWppWfY cofZdap, 3 SWii. Q.O. 782; Olsqeaok OqaWjpefm rl. t. Lloq
SWoZakp (1867) 6 SWii. Q.O. 31; roWkZWii t. JatWZW, (1867) 6 SWii. Q.O.
35; Sefqa'p cWkh t. Ojfqe (1868) 7 SWii. Q.O. 646; SWofkd t. IlXfia
(1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 110; LWsi t. RfodfkfW (1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 168;
Peljplk t. LWYfbfY N. rl. (1869) 9 SWii.Q.O. 579; ulvkeWj t. AiawWkZofW 
(1869) 10 SWii. Q.O. 173; rifkqlk cofZda (1870) 10 SWii. Q.O. 454; Pea
uWkfai cWii (1870) 10 SWii Q.O.557; Hftaomlli Ekp. rl. t. IWppWYespaqqp
(1870) 10 SWii Q.O. 566; Pea Ilkqaiil (1870) 11 SWii. Q.O. 411; xw m.
IYJfai (1871) 13 SWii Q.O. 236; OqWqa Boafdeq PWw rWpa (1872) 15 SWii.
Q.O. 232; OqWqa PWw lk NWfivWy Colpp NaYafmqp (1872) 15SWii. Q.O. 284;
KpXloka t. IlXfia (1872) 16 SWii. Q.O. 479; refYWdl, aqY., N. rl. t.
Bsiiao (1873) 17SWii. Q.O.560; cWoqajayao t. ElvW (1873) 18 SWii. Q.O.
129; uaiWvWoa NWfiolWZ PWw (1873) 18 SWii. Q.O. 206; Laaqa t. IlodWk
(1873) 19 SWii. Q.O. 581; usXsnsa, aqY., N. rl. t. NfYejlkZ (1873) 19
SWii. Q.O. 584; cWiqfjloa, aqY., N. rl. t. IWoyiWkZ (1874) SWii. Q.O.
456; Pea HlqqWvWkkW, (1874) 21 SWii. Q.O. 558; SWiqWk t. Ifpplsof,
(1875) 91 Q.O. 275; DakZaoplk t. Jav Uloh. (1876) 92 Q. & 259; rey Hlkd
t. BoaaZjWk. (1875) 92 Q.O. 275; Olsqe rWolifkW t. CalodfW, (1876) 93
Q.O. 4; OeaoilYh t. Aiifkd, (1876) 93 Q.O. 99; Q.O. t. 43 CWiilkp lb
Sefphy, (1876) 93 Q.O. 188; Blpqao t. Jav KoiaWkp (1876) 94 Q.O. 246;
IWroaWZy t. RfodfkfW, (1876) 94 Q.O. 391; @kfS, DWkkfXWi xqY., N. rl.
t. Dspak, (1877) 95 Q.O. 465; LlskZ t. PsoYh, (1877) 95 Q.O. 459; DWii
t. ua rsfo, (1877) 95 Q.O. 485; LakpWYliW Pai. rl. t. Sapqaok Qkflk Pai.
rl., (1877) 96 Q.O. 1; clpqlk caao Yl. t. IWppWYespaqqp (1877) 97 Q.O.
25; rllh t. LakkpyitWkfW (1878) 97 Q.O. 566; Seaaifkd, aqY., PoWkpm. rl.
t. Seaaifkd (1878) 99 Q.O. 273; Jloqevapqaok Qkflk LWYhaq rl. t.
Oq.Hlsfp (1879) 100 Q.O. 423; Csy t. cWiqfjloa (1879) 100 Q.O. 434;
GfoqiWkZ t. DlqYehfpp (1879) 100 Q. O. 491; Dlva IWYe. rl. t. CWda,
(1879) 100 Q. O. 676; PoWZa-jWoh rWpap (1879) 100 Q.O. 82; Sfiplk t.
IYJWjaa, (1881) 102 Q.O. 572; PfaokWk t. Nfkhao, (1880) 102 Q. O. 123;
HloZ t. CllZWii, aqY., OqaWjpefm rl., (1881) 102 Q. O. 641; IlXfia
rlskqy t. GfjXWii, (1881) 102 Q.O. 691; Sapqaok Qkflk Pai. rl. t. PawWp,
(1881) 105 Q.O. 460; Javmloq, aqY., cofZda rl. t. Q.O., (1881) 105 Q.
O. 470; Sfddfkp Baooy rl. t. xWpq Oq. Hlsfp, (1882) 107 Q.O. 365; Psosao
t. IWoyiWkZ, (1882) 107 Q.O. 38; xpYWkWXW aqY., PoWkpm. rl. t. refYWdl,
(1892) 107 Q. O. 678; Ifiiao t. Jav Uloh, (1883) 169 Q.O. 383; IloWk t.
Jav KoiaWkp. (1884) 112 Q.O. 69; Blpqao t. GWkpWp, (1884) 112 Q.O. 201;
DaWZ Ilkay rWpap. (i884) 112 Q.O. 680; rWoZvaii t. AjaofYWk cofZda rl.,
(1885) 113 Q. O. 205; rllmao Ibd. rl. t. Baodsplk, (1885) 113 Q.O. 727;
CilsYapqao Baooy rl. t. LakkpyitWkfW. (1885) 114 Q.O. 196; colvk t.
Dlspqlk. (1895) 114 Q.O. 622; NWfiolWZ rljjfppflk rWpap (1886) 116 Q.O.
307, 347, 352; SWiifkd t. IfYefdWk, (1886) 116 Q.O. 446; rla t. xooli,
(1886) 116 Q.O. 517; LfYhWoZ t. LsiijWk Olsqeaok rWo. rl., (1886) 117
Q.O. 34; Pakkappaa t.LsiijWk Olsqeaok rWo rl. (1886) 117 Q.O. 51;
IlodWk'p OqaWjpefm rl. t. HlsfpfWkW clWoZ lb DaWiqe (1886) 118 Q.O. 455;
SWXWpe, aqY., N. rl. t. Eiifklfp (1886) 118 Q.O. 557; Q.O. t. GWdWjW
(1886) 118 Q.O. 375; LefiWZaimefW Bfoa ApplY t. Jav Uloh (1886) 119 Q.O.
110; Fleplk t. refYWdl, aqY., xiatWqlo rl. (1886) 119 Q.O. 388; NlXXfkp
t. OeaiXy rlskqy PWwfkd ufpq. (1887) 120 Q.O. 489; rloplk t. IWoyiWkZ,
(1887) 120 Q. O. 502; BWodl t. IfYefdWk, (1887) 121 Q.O. 230;
LefiWZaimefW.. aqY., OqaWjpefm rl., t. LakkpyitWkfW. (1887) 122 Q.O.
322; Sapqaok Qkflk Pai. rl. t. LakZiaqlk (1887) 122 Q.O. 347; OWkZp t.
IWkfqaa Nftao Ejm. rl.. (1887) 123 Q.O. 288; Ojfqe t. AiWXWjW (1888) 124
Q.O. 465; SfiiWjaqqa Eolk cofZda rl. t. DWqYe (1888) 125 Q.O. 1; LajXfkW
rlkpli. Ofitao Ifk., aqY., rl. t. LakkpyitWkfW (1888) 126 Q.O. 181;
clvjWk t. refYWdl, aqY., N. Yl. (1888) 125 Q.O. 406; Sapqaok Qkflk Pai.
rl. t. Aqqy.-Cak. (1888) 125. Q.O. 630; rWifblokfW t. rakqoWi LWY. N.
rl., (1889) 127 Q. O. 1; NWqqaojWk t. Sapqaok Qkflk Pai. rl. (1888) 127
Q.O. 411; Hailsm t. IlXfia, (1888) 127 Q.O. 640; GfZZ t. LaWopWlk,
(1888) 128 Q. O. 1; Apeao t. PawWp (1888) 128 Q.O. 129; JWpetfiia, aqY.,
N. Yl. t. AiWXWjW, (1888) 128 Q.O. 96, OqlsqakXsode t. DakkfYh, (1889)
129 Q.O. 141; Gfjjfpe t. cWii, (1889) 129 Q.O. 217; Sapqaok Qkflk Pai.
rl. t. AiWXWjW OqWqa clWoZ lb Appappjakq, (1889) 132 Q.O. 472; Bofqqp
t. LWijao, (1889) 132 Q.O. 282; Hlsfptfiia, aqY. N. rl. t. Ifppfppfmmf,
(1890) 133 Q.O. 587; Hafpy t. DWoZfk (1890) 135 Q.O. 100; reaolhaa
JWqflk t. Olsqeaok GWkpWp N. rl. (1890) 135 Q.O. 641; IYrWii t.
rWifblokfW, (1890) 136 Q.O. 104; Jloblih, aqY., N. rl. t. LakkpyitWkfW,
(1890) 136 Q.O. 114; IfkkaplqW t. cWoXao, (1890) 136 Q.O. 318, PawWp,
aqY., N. rl. t. Olsqeaok LWY. rl., (1890) 137 Q.O. 48; cofjjao t.
NaXjWk, (1891) 138 Q.O. 78; IWkYeapqao t. IWppWYespaqqp (1891) 139 Q.
O. 240; Ek oa NWeoao, (1891) 140 Q.O. 646; LsiijWk'p LWiWYa rWo rl. t.
LakkpyitWkfW, (1891) 141 Q.O. 18; IWppWYespaqqp t. Sapqaok Qkflk Pai.
rl.. (1891) 141 Q.O. 40; rosqYeao t. GakqsYhy, (1891) 141 Q.O. 47;
Rlfdeq t. Sofdeq (1891) 141 Q.O. 62; DakZaoplk cofZda rl. t. DakZaoplk
(1891) 141 Q.O. 679; Ek oa CWokaqq (1891) 141 Q.O. 1; IWfka t. CoWkZ
Poskh N. rl., (1881) 142 Q.O. 217; JfpefjsoW xhfs t. Q.O. (1892) 142
Q.O. 651; LWYfbfY xwmoapp rl. t. OafXaoq, (1802) 142 Q.O. 339; Dlok
Ofitao Ifk. rl. t. Jav Uloh, (1892) 143 Q.O. 305; BfaiZ t. riWoh. (1892)
143 Q.O. 849; K'Jafi t. Raojlkq. (i892) 144 Q.O. 323; BfYhiak t. OeaiXy
rlskqy PWwfkd ufpq. (1892) 145 Q.O. 1; Haefde RWiiay N. rl. t.
LakkpyitWkfW. (1892) 145 Q.O. 102; DWojWk t. refYWdl, (1893) 147 Q.O.
396; IlklkdWeaiW JWt. rl. t. Q.O. (1893) 148 Q.O. 312; coakkWk t.
Pfqsptfiia, (1894) 153 Q.O. 289; coWpp t. Jloqe uWhlqW. (1894) 163 Q.O.
391; Apeiay t. NyWk. (1894) 153 Q.O. 436; Hswqlk t. Jloqe Nftao cofZda
rl. (1894) 153 Q.O. 525; LlpqWi Pai.-rWXia rl. t. reWoiapqlk (1894) 153
Q.O. 692; rltfkdqlk, aqY.. cofZda rl. t. GakqsYhy (1894) 154 
Q.O. 204; EkqaopqWqa rljjaoYa rljjfppflk t. cofjplk (1894) 154 Q.O. 447;
Lisjiay t. IWppWYespaqqp(1894) 155 Q.O. 461; PawWp, aqY. N. rl. t.
EkqaopqWqa PoWkpm. rl., (1895) 155Q.O. 585; Dllmao t. rWifblokfW (1895)
155 Q.O. 648; LlpqWi Pai.-rWXia rl. t. AZWjp (1895) 155 Q.O. 688; Q.O.
t. x.r. Gkfdeq rl., (1895) 156 Q.O. 1; xjaoq t. Ifpplsof (1895) 156 Q.O.
296; LfqqpXsod, aqY., rlWi rl. t. HlsfpfWkW (1895) 156 Q.O. 590; Csib,
aqY., N. rl. t. Dabiay (1895) 158 Q.O. 98; Jav Uloh, aqY., N. rl. R.
LakkpyitWkfW (1895) 158 Q.O. 431; Ek oa uaXp (1895) 158 Q.O. 564; Coaao
t. rlkkaYqfYsq (1896) 161 Q.O. 519; Sapqaok Qkflk Pai. rl. t. FWjap,
(1896) 162 Q.O. 650; Sapqaok Qkflk Pai. rl. t. PWddWoq, (1896) 163 Q.
O. 1; Eiifklfp rakq. N. rl. t. Eiifklfp, (1896) 163 Q. O. 142;
Dakkfkdqlk t. CalodfW (1896) 163 Q.O. 299; KpXloka t. BilofZW, (1897)
164 Q.O. 650; OYlqq t. ulkWiZ, (1897) 165 Q.O. 58; AZWjp xwmoapp rl. t.
Kefl OqWqa AsZfqlo (1897) 165 Q.O. 194; HWha Oeloa, aqY., N. rl. t. Kefl
(1897) 165 Q.O.365; Jav Uloh, aqY., N.rl.t.Jav Uloh (1897) 165 Q.O. 628;
CiWZplk t. IfkkaplqW (1897) 166 Q.O. 427; DakZaoplk cofZda rl.t.
GakqsYhy (1897) 166 Q.O. 150; Oq. Akqelky BWiip SWqao Llvao rl. t. Oq.
LWsi SWqao rlj'op (1897) 168 Q.O. 349; refYWdl, aqY., N. rl. t. OliWk
(1898) 169 Q.O. 133; Ifpplsoqf, xqY., N. rl. t. eWXao (1898) 169 Q.O.
613; NfYejlkZ, aqY., N. rl. t. N. A. LWqqaoplk PlXWYYl rl., (1898) 169
Q.O. 311; NelZap t. ElvW (1898) 170 Q.O. 412; RWkYa t. S.A. RWkZaoYllh
rl., (1898) 170Q.O. 438; OYeliiakXaodao t. LakkpyitWkfW (1898) 171 Q.O.
1; rliifkp t. Jav eWjmpefoa (1898) 171 Q.O. 30; LWqWmWYl CsWkl rl. t.
Jloqe rWolifkW clWoZ lb AdofYsiqsoa (1898) 171 Q.O. 345; Jav Uloh t.
NlXaoqp (1898) 171 Q.O. 658; Dlmhfkp t. Q.O. (1898) 171 Q.O. 578;
AkZaoplk t. Q.O. (1898) 171 Q.O. 604; Coaak cWy, aqY., rWkWi rl. t.
LWqqak LWmao rli, (1898) 172 Q.O. 58; iWha Oeloa, aqY., N. rl. t. Kefl
(1899) 173Q.O. 285; DakZaoplk cofZda rl. t. DakZaoplk (1899) 173Q.O.
592; Ifpplsof, aqY., N. rl. t. IYrWkk (1899) 174 Q.O. 580; AZZypqlk
Lfma, aqY., rl. t. Q.O. (1899) 175 Q.O. 211;HlsfpfWkW t. PawWp (1900)
176 Q.O. 1; Q.O. t. caiifkdeWj cWy  cllj rl. (1900) 176 Q.O. 211;
HfkZpWy, aqY., rl. t. Isiiak (1900) 176 Q.O. 126; SWqao-LfaoYa Kfi rl.
t. PawWp (1900) 177 Q.O. 28 Jav Uloh H. Ekp.rl. t. roWtakp (1900) 178
Q.O. 389; OYoWkqlk t. Seaaiao (1900) 179 Q.O. 141; SfiifWjp t. BaWop
(1900) 179 Q.O. 270; SfpYlkpfk aqY., N. rl. t. FWYlXplk (1900) 179 Q.O.
287; reapWmaWha, aqY., N. rl. t. GakqsYhy (1900) 179 Q.O. 388; NayjWkk
coavfkd rl. t. cofpqao (1900) 179 Q.O. 445; S. S. rWodfii rl. t.
IfkkaplqW (1900) 180 Q.O. 452; NWpjsppak t. EZWel (1901) 181 Q.O. 198;
Ojfqe t. Oq. Hlsfp, aqY., N. rl. (1901) 181 Q.O. 248; rWmfqWi rfqy uWfoy
rl. t. Kefl (1902) 183 Q.O. 238; 
Hlsfptfiia,aqY., N. rl. R GakqsYhy (1902) 183 Q.O.503; Jsqqfkd t.
IWppWYespaqqp (1902) 183 Q.O. 553; IYreloZ t. Hlsfptfiia, aqY., N.
rl.(1902) 183 Q.O. 483; Hlsfptfiia, xqY., N. rl. t. xsXWkh (1902) 184
Q.O. 27; OqlYhWoZ t. IlodWk (1902) 185 Q.O. 27; IfkkaWmlifp, aqY., N.
rl. t. IfkkaplqW (1902) 186 Q.O. 257; NafZ t. rliloWZl (1902) 187 Q.O.
137; Sapqaok Qkflk Pai. rl. t. Jav Dlma (1903) 187 Q.O. 419; ufWjlkZ
Cisa rl. t. Q.O. Cisa rl. (1903) 187 Q.O. 611; Hlspftfiia, aqY., Baooy
rl. t. GakqsYhy (1902) 188 Q.O. 385; Q.O. t. HykWe (1903) 188Q.O. 445;
rsjjfkdp t. refYWdl (1903) 188 Q.O. 410; Pea NlWklha (1903) 189 Q.O.
185; Ilkqdljaoy t. LloqiWkZ (1903) 190 Q.O. 89; Laqqaoplk t. cWoh xsZloW
(1903) 190 Q.O. 169; Aiiak t. LsiijWk'p LWiWYa rWo rl., (1903) 191 Q.O.
171; Jav Uloh t. Gkfdeq (1904) 192 Q.O. 21; LlpqWi Pai.-rWXia rl. t.
PWyilo (1904) 192 Q.O. 64; rolppjWk t. HsojWk (1904) 192 Q.O. 189; Oq.
riWforlskqy t. EkqaopqWqa OWkZ rl., aqY., (1904) 192 Q.O. 189; csqqbfaiZ
t. OqoWkWeWk (1904) 192Q.O. 470; AjaofYWk Oqaai, aqY., rl. t. OmaaZ
(1904) 192 Q.O. 500; Jloqeaok OaYsofqfap rl. R. Q.O. (1904) 193 Q.O.
197. 
(21) Oqsodap t. rolvkfkpefaiZ (1819) 4 SeaWq. Q.O. 122; I'IfiiWk t.
I'Jafii (1819) 4SeaWq. Q.O. 131; KdZak t. OWskZaop (1827) 12 SeaWq. Q.O.
213; clyiat. VWYeWofa (1832) 6 Laq. Q.O. 348; CWppfap t. cWiilk (1832)
6 Laq. Q.O. 761; caaop t. eWsdeqlk (1835) 9Laq. Q.O. 329; OsyZWj t.
colWZjWw (1840) 14 Laq. Q.O. 67; rllh t. IlbbWq (1847) 5 Dlv. Q.O. 295;
uoaZ OYlqq t. OWkZbloZ (1856) 19 Dlv. Q.O. 393; JfpefjsoW xhfs t. Q.O.
(1892) 142 Q.O. 651; DWkltao JWq. cWkh t. Ilypap(1902) 186 Q.O. 181. 
   Pea mlvao lb rlkdoapp ql mWpp XWkhosmq iWvp fp klq awYispfta, Xsq qeWq 
mlvao jWy Xa awaoYfpaZ Xy qea OqWqap awYamq veak fq fp WYqsWiiy
awaoYfpaZ Xy rlkdoapp WkZ qea OqWqa iWvp YlkbifYq vfqe qea BaZaoWi iWv.
Eq fp klq qea jaoa awfpqakYa lb qea mlvao ql akWYq psYe iWvp, Xsq fqp
awaoYfpa Xy rlkdoapp, vefYe fp fkYljmWqfXia vfqe qea awaoYfpa lb qea
pWja mlvao Xy qea OqWqa. Kqeaovfpa vfqe qea mlvao ql mWpp skfbloj
BaZaoWi iWvp lb kWqsoWifzWqflk. "Pea Yfqfzakp lb Wky lka pqWqa Xafkd
akqfqiaZ Xy qea rlkpqfqsqflk ql akgly qea ofdeqp lb YfqfzakWpefm fk
ataoy lqeao pqWqa, qeWq bWYq YoaWqap Wk fkqaoapq fk qefp mWoqfYsiWo fk
aWYe lqeao'p WYqp, vefYe Zlap klqawfpq vfqe oadWoZ ql qeafo XWkhosmq
iWvp; pfkYa OqWqa WYqp lb kWqsoWifzWqflk vlsiZ qesp Xa awqoW-qaoofqlofWi
fk qeafo lmaoWqflk, WkZ eWta Wk fkbisakYa lk qeajlpq tfqWi fkqaoapq lb
lqeao OqWqap. Kk qeapa dolskZp, OqWqa iWvplb kWqsoWifzWqflkjWy Xa
Xolsdeq skZao lka lb qea blso eaWZp lo YiWppap lb mlvaop moaYisZaZ ql
qea OqWqap, ql vfq, qeWq lb fkYljmWqfXifqy." KdZak t. OWskZaop (1827)
12 SeaWq Q.O. 277. Oaa Wipl LafoYa t. Jav DWjmpefoa (1847) 5 Dlv. Q.O.
585; uoaZ OYlqq t. OWkZbloZ (18560 19 Dlv. Q.O. 405; CfijWk t. HlYhvllZ
(1866) 4 SWii. Q.O. 410; colvk t. OjWoq (1892) 145 Q.O. 457. 
(22) cofpYla t. GakqsYhy rlj. cWkh (1837)11 Laq. Q.O. 267; Blw t. Kefl
(1847)5 Dlv. Q.O. 410; Q.O. t. IWofdliZ (1850) 9 Dlv. Q.O. 560; HadWi
PakZao rWpap (1870) 12 SWii. Q.O. 545; Pea IfWkqfkljf (1855) 3 SWii. Fo.
(r.r.) 46,17 BaZ. rWpap Jl. 9,521. 
   "Pea rlkpqfqsqflk vWp fkqakZaZ ql boWja W dltaokjakq Wp ZfpqfkdsfpeaZ
bolj W iaWdsa lo YljmWYq, W dltaokjakq psmoaja fk plja mWoqfYsiWop ltao
OqWqap WkZ malmia. Eq vWp ZapfdkaZ ql moltfZa qea pWja YsooakYy, eWtfkd
W skfbloj iadWi tWisa fk Wii qea OqWqap. Eq vWp blo qefp oaWplk qea
mlvao ql Ylfk jlkay WkZ oadsiWqa fqp tWisa vWp YlkbaooaZ smlk qea
BaZaoWi Cltaokjakq, vefia qea pWja mlvao Wp vaii Wp qea mlvao ql ajfq
Xfiip lb YoaZfq vWp vfqeZoWvk bolj qea OqWqap. Pea OqWqap YWk kl ilkdao
ZaYiWoa veWq peWii Xa jlkay, lo oadsiWqa fqp tWisa. SeWqatao mlvao qeaoa
fp ltao qea YsooakYy fp tapqaZ fk rlkdoapp." HadWi PakZao rWpap (1870)
12 SWii. Q.O. 545. 
(23) LakkpyitWkfW t. Seaaifkd, aqY., cofZda rl., (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O.
421; LakpWYliW Pai. rl. t. Sapqaok Qkflk Pai. rl., (1877) 94 Q.O. 1; xw
m. FWYhplk (1877) 96 Q.O. 727; Ek oa NWmfao, (1892) 143 Q.O. 110; Dlokao
t. Q.O. (1892) 143 Q. O. 207; Ek oa uaXp (1895) 158 Q. O. 564; Eiifklfp
rakq. N. N. rl. t. Eiifklfp (1896) 163 Q. O. 142; CiWZplk t. IfkkaplqW,
(1897) 166 Q. O. 427. 
   "Llpq-lbbfYap WkZ mlpq-olWZp Woa apqWXifpeaZ ql bWYfifqWqa qea
qoWkpjfppflk lb fkqaiifdakYa. clqe YljaoYa WkZ qea mlpqWi paotfYa Woa
miWYa vfqe fk qea mlvao lb rlkdoapp, XaYWspa, Xafkd kWqflkWi fk qeafo
lmaoWqflk, qeay pelsiZ Xa skZao qea molqaYqfkd YWoa lb qea kWqflkWi
dltaokjakq...Ap qeay vaoa akqospqaZ ql qea dakaoWi dltaokjakq blo qea
dllZ lb qea kWqflk, fq fp klq lkiy qea ofdeq, Xsq qea Zsqy, lb rlkdoapp
qlpaa ql fq qeWq fkqaoYlsopa Wjlkd qea OqWqap WkZ qeaqoWkpjfppflk lb
fkqaiifdakYa Woa klq lXpqosYqaZ lo skaYYappWofiy akYsjXaoaZXy OqWqa
oadsiWqflk." LakpWYlWi Pai. rl. t. Sapqaok Qkflk Pai. rl. (1877) 96 Q.O.
1.  
   "Pea OqWqap Xabloa qea Qkflk vWp blojaZ YlsiZ apqWXifpe mlpq lbbfYap
WkZ mlpq-olWZp, WkZ fk Zlfkd pl YlsiZ Xofkd fkql miWy qea mlifYa mlvao
fk qea molqaYqflk lb qeafo Yfqfzakp bolj qea spa lb qea jaWkp pl
moltfZaZ blo msomlpap psmmlpaZ ql awaoq W ZajloWifzfkd fkbisakYa lk qea
malmia. Seak qea mlvao ql apqWXifpe mlpq lbbfYap WkZ mlpq-olWZp vWp
psooakZaoaZ ql qea rlkdoapp fq vWp Wp W Yljmiaqa mlvao, WkZ qea doWkq
YWoofaZ vfqe fq qea ofdeq ql awaoYfpa Wii qea mlvaop vefYe jWZa qeWq
mlvao abbaYqfta." Ek oa NWmfao (1892) 143 Q.O. 134.  
(24) CoWkq t. NWyjlkZ, (1832) 6 Laq. Q.O. 218; SeaWqlk t. Laqaop (1834)
8 Laq. Q.O. 501; PoWZa-IWoh rWpap (1879) 100 Q.O. 82; csoolv-Cfiap
Hfqe.rl. t. OWolky (1884) 111 Q.O. 53; Q.O. t. usaii (1899) 172 Q.O.
576; 
   "Jl OqWqa YWk ifjfq, Ylkqoli, lo atak awaoYfpa qea mlvao. Slliak t.
cWkhao (1877) 2 Bifmm. Q.O. 33,30 BaZ. rWpap Jl. 18,030. 
(25) refpelij t. CalodfW (1793) 2 uWii. Q.O. 419; OqsWoq t. HWfoZ (1803)
1roWkYe. Q.O. 299; Q.O. t. Laqaop (1809) 5 roWkYe Q.O. 115; rleak t.
RfodfkfW (1821) 6 SeaWq. Q.O. 264; IWoqfk t. Dskqao (1816) 1 SeaWq. Q.O.
304; KpXlok t. Q.O. cWkh (1824) 9 SeaWq. Q.O. 738; cakkao t. Lloqao
(1850) 9 Dlv. Q.O. 235; Q.O. t. NfqYefa (1854) 17 Dlv. Q.O. 525; IsooWy
t. DlXlhakHWkZ, aqY., rl. (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 272; xw m. RWiiWkZfdeWj
(1863) 1 SWii. Q.O. 243; Lakklyao t. Jabb (1877) 95 Q.O. 714; Q.O. t.
Qkflk LWY. N. rl. (1878) 98 Q.O. 560; IfqYeaii t. riWoh (1884) 110 Q.O.
633; Ajap t. GWkpWp (1884) 111 Q.O. 449; Ek oa Hlkay (1890) 134 Q.O.
373; Ek oa Coaak (1890) 134 Q.O. 377; IYAiifpqao t. Q.O. (1891) 141 Q.O.
174; NlXaoqplk t. cWiZvfk (1897) 165 Q.O. 275; DWkltao JWq.cWkh t.
Ilypap (1902) 186 Q.O. 181. 
   Eq fp jWkfbapq qeWq qea rlkpqfqsqflk oansfoap W psmoaja Ylsoq ql Xa
apqWXifpeaZ. csq rlkdoapp fp Wipl XlskZ "ql YoaWqa plja fkbaoflo Ylsoqp,
fk vefYe ql tapq Wii qeWq gsofpZfYqflk vefYe, skZao qea rlkpqfqsqflk,
fp awYispftaiy tapqaZ fk qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, WkZ lb vefYe qea Osmoaja
rlsoq YWkklq qWha lofdfkWi YldkfzWkYa. Peay jfdeq apqWXifpe lka loa jloa
fkbaoflo Ylsoqp; qeay jfdeq mWoYai lsq qea gsofpZfYfqlk Wjlkd psYe
Ylsoqp, bolj qfja ql qfja, Wq qeafo lvk miaWpsoa. csq qea velia gsZfYfWi
mlvao lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap pelsiZ Xa, Wq Wii qfja, tapqaZ afqeao fk Wk
lofdfkWi lo WmmaiWqa bloj, fk plja Ylsoqp YoaWqaZ skZao fqp Wsqelofqy."
Lao Oqloy, F., fk IWoqfk t. Dskqao (1816) 1 SeaWq. Q.O. 331. 
(26) Q.O. t. LWijao (1818) 3 SeaWq Q.O. 610; Q.O. t. SfiqXaodao(1820)
5 SeaWq Q.O. 76; Q.O. t. Ojfqe (1820) 5SeaWq Q.O. 153; Q.O. t. Bsoilkd
(1820) 5 SeaWq. Q.O. 184; Q.O. t. AoglkW (1887) 120 Q.O. 479. 
   Pea mlvao lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap ql mskfpe Wk WYq Ylkpqfqsqfkd Wk
lbbakpa WdWfkpq qea iWv lb kWqflkp Zlap klq moatakq W OqWqa bolj
moltfZfkd blo qea mskfpejakq lb qea pWja qefkd, veaoa qea WYq fp Wk
lbbakpa WdWfkpq qea Wsqelofqy lb qea OqWqa Wp vaii Wp qeWq lb qea QkfqaZ
OqWqap. Q.O. t. AoglkW (1887) 120 Q.O. 479. 
(27)colvk t. Q.O. (1814) 8 roWkYe Q.O. 110; AjaofYWk Ekp. rl. t. 356
cWiap rlqqlk (1828) 1 Laq. Q.O. 511; Iop. AiawWkZao'p rlqqlk (1864) 2
SWii Q.O. 404; Ifiiao t. Q.O. (1870) 11 SWii. Q.O. 268; Pyiao t. uaboaap
(1870) 11 SWii. Q.O. 331; OqavWoq t. GWek (1870) 11 SWii Q.O. 493;
eWjfiqlkt. ufiifk (1874) 21 SWii Q.O. 73; HWjWo t. colvka (1875) 92 Q.O.
187; IWybfaiZ t. NfYeWoZp (1885) 115 Q.O. 137; refkapa xwYispflk rWpa
(1889) 130 Q.O. 581; resoYe lbFapsp reofpq t. Q.O. (1890) 136 Q.O. 1;
JfpefjsoW xhfs t. Q.O. 142 Q.O. 651. 
   "Pea BaZaoWi mlvao eWp W ofdeq ql ZaYiWoa WkZ molpaYsqa vWop, WkZ, Wp
W kaYappWoy fkYfZakq, ql oWfpa WkZ qoWkpmloq qollmp qeolsde WkZ ltao qea
qaoofqloy lb Wky OqWqa lb qea Qkflk. Eb qefp ofdeq fp ZamakZakq fk Wky
pakpa, elvatao ifjfqaZ, smlk qea miaWpsoa lb qea OqWqa, qea dltaokjakq
fqpaib jWy Xa ltaoqeolvk Xy Wk lXpqosYqflk ql fqp awaoYfpa." roWkZWii
t. JatWZW (1807) 6 SWii. Q.O. 44. 
(28) roWkZWii t. JatWZW (1867) 6 SWii. Q.O. 35; JfpefjsoW xhfs t. Q.O.
(1892) 142 Q.O. 651. 
   "Pea iadfpiWqflk lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap vfii Xa lXifdaZ, Xy qefp
moltfpflk, lkYa Wq iaWpq fk ataoy qvl yaWop, ql ZaifXaoWqa smlk qea
molmofaqy lb haamfkd W jfifqWoy bloYa lk bllq; ql Ylja ql W kav
oaplisqflk lk qefp mlfkq; WkZ ql ZaYiWoa qeafo pakpa lb qea jWqqao Xy
W blojWi tlqa fk qea bWYa  lb qeafo Ylkpqfqsakqp. Peay Woa klq Wq
ifXaoqy ql tapq fk qea awaYsqfta ZamWoqjakq maojWkakq bskZp blo qea
psmmloq lb Wk Wojy, fb qeay vaoa atak skYWsqflsp aklsde ql Xa vfiifkd
ql oamlpa fk fqpl fjmolmao W YlkbfZakYa."DWjfiqlk, fk Pea BaZaoWifpq,
Jl. TTRE. 
   "Ajlkd qea mlvaop WppfdkaZ ql qea kWqflkWi dltaokjakq, fp qea mlvao
ql oWfpa WkZ psmmloq Wojfap'WkZ qea mlvao `ql moltfZa blo qea dltaokjakq
WkZ oadsiWqflk lb qea iWkZ WkZ kWtWi bloYap.' Pea awaYsqflk lb qeapa
mlvaop bWiip vfqefk qe aifka lb fqp Zsqfap; WkZ fqp Ylkqoli ltao qea
psXgaYq fp miakWoy WkZ awYispfta....Jl fkqaobaoakYa vfqe qea awaYsqflk
lb qefp mlvao lb qea kWqflkWi dltaokjakq fk qea blojWqflk, lodWkfzWqflk,
WkZ dltaokjakq lb fqp Wojfap Xy Wky OqWqa lbbfYfWip YlsiZ Xa maojfqqaZ
vfqelsq doaWqiy fjmWfofkd qea abbfYfakYy lb, fb fq ZfZ klq sqqaoiy
Zapqoly, qefp XoWkYe lb qea msXifY paotfYa." PWoXia'p rWpa (1871) 13
SWii. Q.O. 408. 
(29) Q.O. t. catWkp (1818) 3 SeaWq. Q.O. 336; uykap t. Dlltao (1857) 20
Dlv. Q.O. 85. 
   "Pea Wsqelofqy ql XsfiZ WkZ ansfm tappaip lb vWo fp, ZlsXqiapp,
fjmifaZ fk qea mlvao ql ZaYiWoa vWo, Xsq qea pWja Wsqelofqy fp jloa
ZfoaYqiy YlkbaooaZ Xy qea mlvao ql `moltfZa WkZ jWfkqWfk W kWty.'" Q.O.
t. csoifkdqlk, aqY., Baooy rl. (1884) 1 AXX.Q.O. 28, 27 BaZ. rWpap Jl.
16,151. 
(30) Dlspqlk t. Illoa (1820) 5 SeaWq. Q.O. 1; IWoqfk t. Ilqq (1827) 12
SeaWq. Q.O. 19; Hsqeao t. cloZak (1849) 7 Dlv. Q.O. 1; roWkZWii t.
JatWZW (1867)6SWii Q.O. 35; PawWp t. Sefqa (1868)7 SWii Q.O. 700;
Loappao t. Eiifklfp (1886) 116 Q.O. 252. 
   "Ol ilkd Wp qea jfifqfW Woa WYqfkd skZao qea jfifqWoy gsofpZfYqflk lb
qea OqWqa ql vefYe qeay Xailkd, qea mlvaop lb iadfpiWqflk ltao qeaj Woa
YlkYsooakq fk qea dakaoWi WkZ OqWqa dltaokjakq. rlkdoapp eWp mlvao ql
moltfZa blo lodWkfzfkd, Wojfkd, WkZ ZfpYfmifkfkd qeaj; WkZ qefp mlvao
Xafkd skifjfqaZ, awYamq fk qea qvl mWoqfYsiWop lb lbbfYaofkd WkZ
qoWfkfkd qeaj, WYYloZfkd ql qea ZfpYfmifka ql Xa moapYofXaZ Xy rlkdoapp,
fq jWy Xa awaoYfpaZ ql Wky awqakq qeWq jWy Xa ZaajaZ kaYappWoy Xy
rlkdoapp. csq Wp OqWqa jfifqfW, qea mlvao lb qea OqWqa dltaokjakqp ql
iadfpiWqa lk qea pWja psXgaYqp, eWtfkd awfpqaZ moflo ql qea blojWqflk
lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk, WkZ klq eWtfkd Xaak molefXfqaZ Xy qeWq fkpqosjakq,
fq oajWfkp vfqe qea OqWqap, psXloZfkWqa kataoqeaiapp ql qea mWoWjlskq
iWv lb qea dakaoWi dltaokjakq, lmaoWqfkd smlk qea pWja psXgaYq." Dlspqlk
t. Illoa (1820) 5 SeaWq. Q.O. 16. 
(31) DamXsok t. xiizay (1804) 2 roWkYe Q.O. 445; HlsdeXlolsde t. ciWha
(1820)  5 SeaWq. Q.O. 317; rleak t. RfodfkfW (1821) 6 SeaWq. Q.O. 264;
AjaofYWk Ekp. rl. t. 356 cWiap lb rlqqlk(1828) 1 Laq. Q.O. 511; GakZWii
t. Q.O. (1838) 12 Laq. Q.O. 524; Q.O. t. uavfqq (1869) 9 SWii. Q.O. 41;
uskmey t. Giafkpjfqe (1870) 11 SWii. Q.O. 610; SfiiWoZ t. LoapXsoy
(1871) 14 SWii Q.O. 676; Glei t. Q.O. (1875) 91 Q.O. 367; Lefiifmp t.
LWyka (1875) 92 Q.O. 130; Q.O. t. Blw (1876) 94 Q.O. 315; Bq.
HaWtakvloqe N. rl. t. Hlva (1885) 114 Q.O. 525; CfXXlkp t. ufpqofYq lb
rlisjXfW (1886) 116 Q.O. 404; RWk colYhifk t. Pakkappaa (1886) 117 Q.O.
151; OqlsqakXsode t. DakkfYh (1889) 129Q.O. 141; Calboly t. Nfddp(1890)
133 Q.O. 258; cakplk t. Q.O. (1892) 146 Q.O. 325; OelajWhao t. Q.O.
(1893) 147 Q.O. 282; reWmmaii t. Q.O. (1896) 160 Q.O. 499; Kefl t.
PeljWp (1899) 173 Q.O. 276; vfdeqt. uWtfZplk (1901) 181 Q.O. 371. 
   "Seak qea qfqia fp WYnsfoaZ Xy msoYeWpa Xy Ylkpakq lb qea iadfpiWqsoap
lb qea OqWqap, qea BaZaoWi gsofpZfYqflk fp awYispfta lb Wii OqWqa
Wsqelofqy. Pefp bliilvp bolj qea ZaYiWoWqflk lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk qeWq
rlkdoapp peWii eWta `ifha Wsqelofqy' ltao psYe miWYap Wp fq eWp ltao qea
ZfpqofYq vefYe fp qea paWq lb dltaokjakq; qeWq fp, qea mlvao lb
`awYispfta iadfpiWqflk fk Wii YWpap veWqplatao.' colWZao lo YiaWoao
iWkdsWda YlsiZ klq Xa spaZ ql awYisZa Wii lqeao Wsqelofqy qeWk qeWq lb
rlkdoapp." Bq. HaWtakvloqe N. rl. t. Hlva (1885) 114 Q.O. 532. 
(32) Q.O. t. DWjfiqlk, (1795) 3 uWii. Q.O. 17; DamXsok t. xiqzay, (1804)
2 roWkYe Q.O. 446; xw m. cliijWk, (1807) 4 roWkYe Q.O. 76; xw m.
GaWokay, (1822) 7 SeaWq. Q.O. 38; xw m. SWqhfkp, (1830) 3 Laq. Q.O. 193;
xw m. IfiXsok, (1636)  9 Laq. Q.O. 704; Dlijap t. Fakkfplk, (1840) 14
Laq. Q.O. 640; xw m. uloo (1845) 3 Dlv. Q.O. 103; Hsqeao t. cloZak,
(1849) 7 Dlv. Q.O. 1; AXiajWk t. cllqe, (1858) 21 Dlv. Q.O. 506; xw m.
RWiiWkZfdeWj, (1863) 1 SWii. Q.O. 243;  xw m. IfiifdWk, (1868) 4 SWii.
Q.O. 2; xw m. IYrWoZia, (1868) 7 SWii. Q.O. 508; xw m. Uaodao, (1868)
8 SWii. Q.O. 85; PWoXia'p rWpa, (1871) 13 SWii. Q.O. 307; xw m. HWkda,
(1873) 18 SWii. Q.O. 163; xw m. LWohp, (1876) 93 Q.O. 18; xw m.
GWopqakZfYh, (1876) 93 Q. O. 396; xw m. RfodfkfW, (1879) 100 Q.O. 339;
Ek oa JaWdia (1890) 135 Q. O. 1; fk oa BoaZaofYe (1893) 149 Q.O. 70. 
   "Pea rlkpqfqsqflk Wipl ZaYiWoap qeWq qea moftfiada lb qea vofq lb
eWXaWp Ylomsp peWii klq Xa pspmakZaZ, skiapp veak fk YWpap lb oaXaiiflk
lo fktWpflk qea msXifY pWbaqy jWy oansfoa fq. Jl awmoapp mlvao fp dftak
ql rlkdoaWj ql paYsoa qefp fktWisWXia ofdeq fk qea klk-aksjaoWqaZ YWpap,
lo ql pspmakZ qea vofq fk YWpap lb oaXaiiflk lo fktWpflk. AkZ yaq fq
vlsiZ Xa ZfbbfYsiq ql pWy, pfkYa qefp doaWq vofq lb ifXaoqy fp spsWiiy
moltfZaZ blo Xy qea loZfkWoy bskYqflkp lb iadfpiWqflk, WkZ YWk Xa
abbaYqsWiiy moltfZaZ blo lkiy fk qefp vWy, qeWq fq lsdeq klq ql Xa
ZaajaZ Xy kaYappWoy fjmifYWqflk vfqefk qea pYlma lb qea iadfpiWqfta
mlvao lb rlkdoapp." Lofdd t. LakkpyitWkfW (1842) 16Laq. Q.O. 619. 
(33) BiaqYeao t. LaYh (1810) 6 roWkYe Q.O. 87; KdZak t. OWskZaop (1827)
12 SeaWq.Q.O. 213; SWqplk t. IaoYao (1834) 9 Laq. Q.O. 88; rWomakqao t.
LakkpyitWkfW (1854) 17 Dlv. Q.O. 456; HlYha t. Jav KoiaWkp (1866) 4 SWii
Q.O. 172; rsjjfkdp t. Ifpplsof (1866) 4 SWii. Q.O. 277; xw m. CWoiWkZ
(1866) 4 SWii. (r.O.) 333; uoaejWk t. Pfqqia (1869) 8 SWii. Q.O. 595;
Gifkdao t. Ifpplsof (1871) 13 SWii. Q.O. 257; LfaoYa t. rWophWZlk (1872)
16 SWii.Q.O. 234; Dlmq t. QqWe (1884) 110 Q.O. 574; rllh t. Q.O. (1891)
138 Q.O. 157; Jaaiy t. Dakhai (1901) 180 Q.O. 109; Olsqevapqaok YlWi rl.
t. IYcofZa (1902) 185 Q.O. 499. 
(34) HfYakpa PWw rWpap (1866) 5 SWii. Q.O. 462; Omofkdao t. Q.O. (1881)
102 Q.O. 586; JfYli t. Ajap (1899) 173 Q.O. 509. 
   "Eb rlkdoapp paap bfq ql fjmlpa W YWmfqWqflk, lo lqeao ZfoaYq qWw, fq
jspq Xa iWfZ fk molmloqflk ql qea Yakpsp; fb rlkdoapp Zaqaojfkap ql
fjmlpa Zsqfap, fjmlpqp, WkZ awYapap, qeay jspq Xa skfbloj qeolsdelsq qea
QkfqaZ OqWqap. Peapa Woa klq pqofYqiy ifjfqWqflkp lb mlvao. Peay Woa
osiap moapYofXfkd qea jlZa fk vefYe fq peWii Xa awaoYfpaZ." RaWzfa cWkh
t. Bakkl (1869) 8 SWii. Q.O. 541. 
(35) rlliay t. clWoZ lb SWoZakp (1851) 12 Dlv. Q.O. 299; LWYa t. csodapp
(1875) 92 Q.O. 372; Psomfk t. csodapp (1886) 117 Q.O. 504; LfqqpXsod,
xqY., rlWi rl. t. cWqap (1895) 156 Q.O. 577; JfYli t. Ajap (1899) 173
Q.O. 509; SfiifWjp t. BaWop (1900) 179  Q.O. 270; ua HfjW t. cfZvaii
(1901) 182 Q.O. 151; Blsoqaak ufWjlkZ Nfkdp t. Q.O. (1901) 183 Q.O. 176;
rlokaii t. rlyka (1904) 192 Q.O. 418. 
   "Pea msomlpa  lb qea oapqofYqflk fp qeWq awmloqWqflk, Wii awmloqWqflk,
peWii Xa boaa bolj kWqflkWi XsoZak." BWfoXWkh t.  Q.O. (1901) 181 Q.O.
292. 
(36) rlliay t. clWoZ lb SWoZakp (1851) 12 Dlv.  Q.O. 299; LakkpyitWkfW
t. Seaaifkd,xqY., cofZda rl. (1855) 18 Dlv.  Q.O. 421; Iskk t. Eiifklfp
(1876) 94 Q.O. 113; Jloqevapqaok Qkflk LWYhaq rl. t. Oq. Hlsfp (1879)
100 Q.O. 423; rfkYfkkWqf, aqY., LWYhaq rl. t. rWqiaqqpXsod (1881) 105 
Q.O. 559; OmoWfdsa t. Peljmplk (1886) 118 Q.O. 90; IlodWk'p OqaWjpefm
Yl. t. HlsfpfWkW clWoZ lb DaWiqe (1886) 118 Q.O. 455; Flekplk t.
refYWdl, aqY., xiatWqlo rl. (1886) 119 Q.O. 388. 
   Pefp YiWspa "fp W ifjfqWqflk smlk qea mlvao lb rlkdoapp ql oadsiWqa
YljjaoYa, blo qea msomlpa lb molZsYfkd akqfoa YljjaoYfWi ansWifqy vfqefk
qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, WkZ Wipl W molefXfqlk smlk qea OqWqa ql ZapqolypsYe
ansWifqy Xy Wky iadfpiWqflk moapYofXfkd W YlkZfqflk smlk vefYe tappaip
XlskZ bolj lka OqWqa peWii akqao qea mloqp lb Wklqeao OqWqa." Lao Io.
FspqfYa SWyka, fk Jloofp t. clpqlk (1849) 7 Dlv. Q.O. 414. Oaa Wipl
LakkpyitWkfW t. Seaaifkd, aqY., cofZda rl. (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 433;
SfiifWjp t. Pea Hfzzfa DakZaoplk (1880) 20 BaZ. rWpap Jl. 17,726W. 
   "Pefp moltfpflk lmaoWqap lkiy Wp W ifjfqWqflk lb qea mlvaop lb
rlkdoapp, WkZ fk kl oapmaYq WbbaYqp qea OqWqap fk qea oadsiWqflk lb
qeafo ZljapqfY WbbWfop." Iskk t. Eiifklfp (1876) 94 Q.O. 135. 
(37) "A OqWqa fp bloXfZZak ql akqao fkql Wky qoaWqy, WiifWkYa, lo
YlkbaZaoWqflk. Eb qeapa YljmWYqp Woa vfqe bloafdk kWqflkp, qeay
fkqaobaoa vfqe qea qoaWqy-jWhfkd mlvao vefYe fp YlkbaooaZ akqfoaiy lk
qea dakaoWi dltaokjakq; fbvfqe aWYe lqeao, blo mlifqfYWi msomlpap, qeay
YWk pYWoYaiy bWfi ql fkqaobaoa vfqe  qea dakaoWi msomlpa WkZ fkqakq lb
qea rlkpqfqsqflk. Pl doWkq iaqqaop lb jWonsa WkZ oamofpWi, vlsiZ iaWZ
ZfoaYqiy ql vWo; qea mlvao lb ZaYiWofkd vefYe fp awmoappiy dftak ql
rlkdoapp." Lao Io. refab FspqfYa IWopeWii, fk cWoolk t. cWiqfjloa (1833)
7 Laq.  Q.O. 249. 
(38) uaYfpflkp oaiWqfkd ql jWhfkd Wkyqefkd Xsq dliZ WkZ pfitao Ylfk W
qakZao fk mWyjakq lb ZaXqp. roWfd t. Ifpplsoq (1830) 4 Laq.  Q.O.
410;cyoka t. Ifpplsoqf (1834) 8 Laq. Q.O. 40; cofpYla t. GakqsYhy rlj.
cWkh (1837) 11 Laq. Q.O. 257; uWoofkdqlk t. coWkYe cWkh (1851) 13 Dlv.
Q.O. 12. 
   uaYfpflkp oaiWqfkd ql aw mlpq bWYql iWv. rWiZao t. csii (1798) 3 uWii.
Q.O. 386; SWqplk t. IaoYao (1834) 8 Laq. Q.O. 88; rWomakqao t.
LakkpyitWkfW, (1854) 17 Dlv. Q.O. 466; HlYha t. Jav KoiaWkp, (1866) 4
SWii. Q.O. 172; xw m. CWoiWkZ (1866) 4 SWii Q.O. 333; Csq t. IfkkaplqW,
(1869) 9 SWii. Q.O. 35; Gofkd t. Ifpplsof, (1882) 107 Q.O. 221; FWaeka
t. Jav Uloh (1888) 128 Q.O. 189; IaZiay, Laqfqflkao, (1890) 134 Q.O.
160; DliZak t. IfkkaplqW (1890) 137 Q.O. 483; DWvhao t. Jav Uloh (1898)
170 Q.O. 189; Peljmplk t. Ifpplsof, (1898) 171 Q.O. 380; IYulkWiZ t.
IWppWYespaqqp, (1901) 180 Q.O. 311; IWiiaqq t. Jloqe rWolifkW (1901) 181
Q.O. 589; Naaqz t. IfYefdWk, (1903) 188 Q. O. 505. 
   uaYfpflkp oaiWqfkd ql iWvp fjmWfofkd qea lXifdWqflk lb YlkqoWYqp.
BiaqYeao t. LaYh, (1810) 6 roWkYe Q.O. 87; Jav Faopay t. Sfiplk, (1812)
7 roWkYe Q.O. 164; Oqsodap t. rolvkfkpefaiZ. (1819) 4 SeaWq. Q.O. 122;
I'IfiiWk t. I'Jafii, (1819) 4 SeaWq. Q.O. 209; uWoqjlsqe rliiada t.
SllZvWoZ, (1819) 4 SeaWq. Q.O. 518; Kvfkdp t. OmaaZ, (1820) 5 SeaWq.
Q.O. 420; BWojakq aqY., cWkh t. Ojfqe, (1821) 6 SeaWq. Q.O. 131; Coaak
t. cfZZia. (1823) 8 SeaWq. Q.O. 1, KdZak t. OWskZaop (1827) 12 SeaWq.
Q.O. 213; IWplk t. NWfia, (1827) 12 SeaWq. Q.O. 370; OWsqaoiaa t.
IWqqeavplk. (1829) 2 Laq. Q.O. 380; FWYhplk t. HWjmefoa (1830) 3 Laq.
Q.O. 280; LoltfZakYa cWkh t. cfiifkdp (183K) 4 Laq. Q.O. 514; IsjjW t.
LlqljWY rl., (1834) 8 Laq. Q.O. 281; caaop t. Dlsdeqlk. (1835) 9 Laq.
Q.O. 329; reWoiap Nftao cofZda t. SWooak cofZda, (1837) 11 Laq. Q.O.
420; Aojpqolkd R. PoaWpsoao, (1842) 16 Laq. Q.O. 281; colkplk t. Gfkzfa.
(1843) 1 Dlv. Q.O. 311; IYroWYhak t. DWyvWoZ (1844) 2 Dlv. Q.O. 608;
CloZlk t. AmmaWi PWw rq., (1845) 3 Dlv. Q.O. 133; IWoyiWkZ t. cWiqfjloa,
aqY., N. rl., (1845) 3 Dlv. Q.O. 534; Jafi t. Kefl, (1845) 3 Dlv. Q.O.
720; rllh t. IlbbWq, (1847) 5 Dlv. Q.O. 295; LiWkqaop' cWkh t. OeWom
(1848) 6 Dlv. Q.O. 301; Sapq Nftao cofZda rl. t. ufw (1848) 6 Dlv. Q.O.
507; roWvbloZ t. coWkYe cWkh, (1849) 7 Dlv. Q.O. 279; SllZosbb t.
PoWmkWii, (1850) 10 Dlv. Q.O. 190; LWsm t. uoav (1850) 10 Dlv. Q.O. 218;
cWiqfjloa. aqY., N. rl. R. JapXfq, (1650) 10 Dlv. Q.O. 395; csqiao t.
LakkpyitWkfW, (1850) 10 Dlv. Q.O. 402; NfYejlkZ, aqY., N. rl. t. HlsfpW
N. rl., (1851) 13 Dlv. Q.O. 71; RfkYakkap Qkftaopfqy t. EkZfWkW, (1852)
14 Dlv. Q.O. 268; rsooWk t. AohWksa. (1853) 15 Dlv. Q.O. 304; LfnsW
coWkYe lb OqWqa cWkh t. Gkllm, (1853) 16 Dlv. Q.O. 369; ulZda t.
Sllipay, (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 331; caaop t. AohWkpWp, (1857) 20 Dlv. Q.O.
527; ApmfkvWii t. uWtfapp rlskqy, (1859) 22 Dlv. Q.O. 364; reofpq resoYe
t. LefiWZaimefW rlskqy, (1860) 24 Dlv. Q.O. 300; DlvWoZ t. csdXaa (1860)
24 Dlv. Q.O. 461; Fabbaoplk coWkYe cWkh t. Ohaiiy, (1861) 1 ciWYh Q.O.
436; BoWkhifk coWkYe cWkh t. Kefl. (1861) 1 ciWYh Q.O. 474; SWXWpe,
aqY., rWkWi rl. t. caaop, (1862) 2 ciWYh Q.O. 448; CfijWk t. OeaXlydWk,
(1862) 2 ciWYh Q.O. 510; LWppWfY Nftao, aqY.. cofZda t. DlXlhak HWkZ
aqY. rl., (1863) 1 SWii. Q.O. 116; DWvqeloka t. rWiab, (1864) 2 SWii.
Q.O. 10; cfkdeWjmqlk cofZda, (1865) 3 SWii. Q.O. 51; SWpefkdqlk, aqY.,
Psokmfha rl. t. IWoyiWkZ, (1865) 3 SWii. Q.O. 210; Ifpplsof, aqY., N.
rl. t. NlYh, (1866) 4 SWii. Q.O. 177; rsjjfkdp t. Ifpplsof, (1866) 4
SWii. Q.O. 177; Rlk DlbbjWk t. MsfkYy, (1866) 4 SWii. Q.O. 536; IsiifdWk
t. rloXfkp, (1868) 7 SWii. Q.O. 487; BsojWk t. JfYeli, (1868) 8 SWii.
Q.O. 44; Dlja lb BofakZiapp t. Nlspa, (1869) 8 SWii. Q.O. 430;
SWpefkdflk Qkftaopfqy t. Nlspa. (1869) 8 SWii. Q.O. 439; csqz t.
IspYWqfka (1869) 6 SWii. Q.O. 675; uoaejWk t. Oqfiia, (1869) 8 SWii.
Q.O. 605; DamXsok t. CofpvliZ, (1869) 8 SWii. Q.O. 603; Kefl, aqY., N.
rl. t. IYrisoa, (1870) 10 SWii. Q.O. 511; HadWi PakZao rWpap, (1870) 12
SWii. Q.O. 457; rsoqfp t. Sefqkay, (1871) 13 SWii. Q.O. 68;
LakkffyitWkfW rliiada rWpap (1871) 13 SWii. Q.O. 190; Sfijfkdqlk aqY.,
N. rl. t. NafZ (1871) 13 SWii. Q.O. 264, xWpq OWdfkWv OWiq Ibd. rl. t.
xWpq OWdfkWv, (1871) 13 SWii. Q.O. 373; Sefqp t. DWoq, (1871) 13 SWii.
Q.O. 646; KpXlok t. JfYeliplk, (1871) 13 SWii. Q.O. 854; JlovfYe, aqY.,
N. rl. t. Flekplk. (1872) 15 SWii. Q.O. 195; OqWqa PWw lk Bloafdk-eaiZ
cskZp; (1872) 16 SWii. Q.O. 300; Pljifkplk t. Fappsm, (1872) 15 SWii.
Q.O. 464; Pljifkplk t. coWkYe. (1872) 15 SWii. Q.O. 460; Ifiiao t. Jav
Uloh (1872) 15 SWii. Q.O. 478; Dliylha SWqao-Llvao rl. t. HyjWk (1872)
16 SWii. Q.O. 500; Cskk t. cWooy (1872) 16 SWii. Q.O. 610; Dsjmeoay t.
Ladsap (1872) 16 SWii. Q.O. 244; SWihao t. SefqaeaWZ, (1872) 16 SWii.
Q.O. 314; Olek t. SWqaoplk (1873) 17 SWii. Q.O. 596; cWofkdp t. uWXkay.
(1873) 19 SWii. Q.O. 1; DaWZ t. Ifpplsof Qkftaopfqy (1873) 19 SWii. Q.O.
526; LWYfbfY N. rl. t. IWdsfoa (1873) 20 SWii. Q.O. 36; CWoofplk t. Jav
Uloh, (1874) 21 SWii. Q.O. 196; KYefiqoaa t. ElvW N. rlkqoWYqfkd rl.,
(1874) 21 SWii. (Q. O.) 249; Sfijfkdqlk, aqY., N. rl. t. Gfkd. (1875)
91 Q.O. 3; Ilsiqfoa rlskqy t. NlYhfkdeWj Pak-rakq OWt.-cWkh (1875) 92
Q.O. 631; Dlja Ekp. rl. t. AsdspqW (1876) 93 Q.O. 118; Sapq SfpYlkpfk
N. rl. t. PoajmaWiaWs rlskqy, (1876) 93 Q.O. 596; Jav Faopay t. UWoZ
(1877) 95 Q.O. 104; rWfol, aqY., N. rl. t. DaYeq (1877) 95 Q.O. 168;
Paooy t. AkZaoplk (1877) 95 Q.O. 628; BWoofkdqlk t. Pakkappaa (1877) 95
Q.O. 679; cilskq t. SfkZiay, (1877) 95 Q.O. 173; IsooWy t. reWoiapqlk,
(1877) 96 Q.O. 432; xZvWoZp t. GaWozay. (1877) 96 Q.O. 595; Pakkappaa
t. OkaaZ (1877) 96 Q.O. 69; SfiifWjp t. cosbby (1877) 96 Q.O. 176;
NfYejlkZ, aqY., N rl. t.NfYejlkZ (1877) 96 Q.O. 521; clpqlk caao rl. t.
IWppWYespaqqp (1877) 97 Q.O. 25; Jloqevapqaok Baoqfifzao rl. t. DyZa
LWoh (1878) 97 Q.O. 659; Iajmefp, aqY., N. rl. t. CWfkap. (1878) 97 Q.O.
697; Q.O. t. Iajmefp (1877) 97 Q.O. 284; Gafqe t. riWoh (1878) 107 Q.O.
454; AqiWkqfY, aqY., N. rl. t. CalodfW, (1878) 98 Q.O. 359; Jloqevapqaok
Qkftaopfqy t. Lalmia, (1878) 99 Q.O. 309; Javqlk t. IWelkfkd rlskqy,
(1879) 100 Q.O. 548; Iajmefp, aqY., N. rl. t. Pakkappaa (1879) 101 Q.O.
337; Sofdeq t. JWdia, (1879) 101 Q.O. 791; Oqlka t. Ifppfppfmmf (1879)
101 Q.O.814; Olsqe, aqY., AiWXWjW N. rl. t. AiWXWjW, (1879) 101 Q.O.
832; HlsfpfWkW t. Jav KoiaWkp (1880) 102 Q.O. 203; DWii t. SfpYlkpfk
(1880) 103 Q.O. 5; LakkfjWk'p rWpa. (1880) 103 Q.O. 714; Slibb t. Jav
KoiaWkp (1860) 103 Q.O. 358; Glpehlklkd t. csoqlk, (1882) 104 Q.O. 668;
Jav DWtak, aqY., N. rl. t. DWjaopiay (1881) 104 Q.O. 1; riWy rlskqy t.
OWtfkdp OlY. (1882) 104 Q.O. 579; Jav Uloh CsWoWkqy, aqY., rl. t. clWoZ
lb HfnsfZWqflk, (1881) 105 Q.O. 622; CoaakvllZ t. Qkflk Boafdeq N. rl.
(1881) 103 Q.O. 13; Oq. AkkW'p Apyisj t. Jav KoiaWkp, (1881) 105 Q.O.
362; HlsfpfWkW t. LfipXsoy (1881) 105 Q.O. 278; Jav KoiaWkp t. Iloofp
(1881) 105 Q.O. 278; rilpa t. CiakvllZ rajaqaoy, (1882) 107 Q.O. 466;
Akqlkf t. Coaakelv, (1882) 107 Q.O. 769; RWkYa t. RWkYa, (1883) 108 Q.O.
514; Iajmefp CWp Hfdeq rl. t. OeaiXy rlskqy PWwfkd ufpq., (EqfX3) 109
Q.O. 398; rWkWZW Olsqeaok N. rl. t. CaXeWoZ (1883) 109 Q.O. 527;
HlsfpfWkW t. Jav KoiaWkp, (1883) 109 Q.O. 285; CfibfiiWk t. Qkflk rWkWi
rl., (1883) 109 Q.O. 401; Omofkd RWiiay SWqao Slohp t. OYelqqiao, (1884)
110 Q.O. 347; csqYeaop' Qsilk OiWsdeqao-Dlspa, aqY., rl. t. roapYakq
rfqy Hfta OqlYh HWkZfkd, aqY, rl., (1884) 111 Q.O. 746; Jaiplk t. LlifYa
Fsoy. (1884) 111 Q.O. 716; IWoya t. LWoplkp, (1884) 114 Q.O. 325;
LlfkZawqao t. Coaakelv, (1884) 114 Q.O. 270; Ajy t. OeaiXy rlskqy PWwfkd
ufpq., (1885) 114 Q.O. 387; Aiiak t. cWiqfjloa, aqY., N. rl., (1884) 114
Q.O. 311; xbbfkdao t. Gakkay, (1885) 115 Q.O. 566; Jav KoiaWkp CWp rl.
t. HlspfWkW Hfdeq rl., (1885) 115 Q.O. 650; Hlsfptfiia CWp rl. t.
rfqfzakp CWp rl., (1885) 115 Q.O. 693. Jav KoiaWkp SWqao-Slohp rl. t.
Nftaop, (1885) 115 Q.O. 674; Bfph t. Fabbaoplk LlifYa Fsoy, (1885) 166
Q.O. 131; IlXfia t. SWqplk (1886) 116 Q.O. 289; Jav KoiaWkp t. Dlspqlk,
(1896) 119 Q.O. 265, Oq. PWjjWky SWqao-Slohp t. Jav KoiaWkp SWqao-Slohp,
(1887) 120 Q.O. 64; resoYe t. Gaipay (1887) 121 Q.O. 282; Haefde SWqao
rl. t. xWpqlk, (1897) 121 Q.O. 388; OafXaoq t. Havfp, (1887) 122 Q.O.
284; Jav KoiaWkp SWqao-Slohp rl. t. HlsfpfWkW OsdWo Nabfkfkd rl. (1888)
125 Q.O. 18; IWykWoZ t. Dfii, (1888) 125 Q.O. 190; uakky t. cakkaqq
(1888) 128 Q.O. 489; SfiifWjplk t. Jav Faopay (1889) 130 Q.O. 189;
BoaaiWkZ t. SfiifWjp, (1889) 131 Q.O. 405; rWjmXaii t. SWZa. (1889) 132
Q.O. 34; LakkpyitWkfW N. rl. t. Ifiiao, (1889) 132 Q.O. 75; Lakkfa t.
Nafp, (1889) 132 Q.O. 464; DWkp t. HlsfpfWkW, (1890) 134 Q.O. 1;
roakpeWv t. Q.O., (1890) 134 Q.O. 99; refYWdl, aqY., N. rl. t.
IfkkaplqW, (1890) 134 Q.O. 418; IfkkaWmlifp xWpqaok N. rl. t. IfkkaplqW,
(1890) 134 Q.O. 467; Dfii t. IaoYeWkqp' Isq. Ekp. rl., (1890) 134 Q.O.
515; IYCWeay t. RfodfkfW. (1890) 135 Q.O. 662; Q.O. t. Jloqe rWolifkW
(189K) 136 Q.O. 211; Seaaiao t. FWYhplk, (1890) 137 Q.O. 245; Oflsw rfqy
Oq. N. rl. t. Oflsw rfqy, (1891) 138 Q.O. 98; Seaaifkd, aqY., cofZda rl.
t. Seaaifkd XofZda rl., (1891) 138 Q.O. 287; Lakklyao t. IYrlkkWsdey
(1891) 140 Q.O. 1; OYlqiWkZ rlskqy rq. t. Q. O., (EZli) 140 Q.O. 41;
xppaw LsXifY NlWZ clWoZ t. Ohfkhia, (1891) 140 Q.O. 334; Oqafk t.
cfaktfiia SWqao Osmmiy rl., (1891) 141 Q.O. 67; Jav KoiaWkp t. Jav
KoiaWkp SWqao Slohp rl., (1891) 142 Q.O. 79; Jav KoiaWkp rfqy, aqY., N.
rl. t. Jav KoiaWkp (1892) 143 Q.O. 199; Hlsfptfiia SWqao rl. t. riWoh
(1892) 143 Q.O. 1; Jav Uloh t. Onsfoa, (1892) 145 Q.O. 175; cWhao t.
Gfidloa, (1892) 145 Q.O. 487; Iloiay t. HWha Oeloa N. rl. (1892) 146
Q.O. 102; DWjfiqlk CWp Hfdeq, aqY. rl. t. DWjfiqlk, (1892) 146 Q.O. 258;
Sfijfkdqlk, aqY.. N. rl. t. AipXollh, (18021 146 Q.O. 279; Eiifklfp
rakqoWi N. rl. t. Eiifklfp (1892) 146 Q.O. 387; cfao t. IYCaeaa, (1893)
148 Q.O. 137; Lalmia t. rllh, (1893) 148 Q.O. 397; Jav Uloh, aqY., N.
rl. t. cofpqli, (1894) 151 Q.O. 656; coyWk t. clWoZ lb xZsYWqflk (1894)
151 Q.O. 639; uskYWk t. Ifpplsof (1894) 152, Q.O. 377; Jav KoiaWkp t.
cakgsfsik, (1894) 153 Q.O. 411; xWdia Ekp. rl. t. Kefl, (1804) 163 Q.O.
440; Jav Uloh, aqY., N. rl. t. LakkpyitWkfW (1894) 153 Q.O. 828; IlXfia,
aqY., N. rl. t. Pakkappaa, (1894) 153 Q.O. 486; Q.O. t. PeljWk, (1895)
156 Q.O. 353; Oq. Hlsfp, aqY., N. rl. t. Cfii, (1895) 156 Q.O. 649; Jav
KoiaWkp rfqy, aqY., N. rl. t. HlsfpfWkW (1895) 157 Q.O. 210; cWkh lb
rljjaoYa t. Pakkaappaa (1895) 161 Q.O. 134; cWiqzao t. Jloqe rWolifkW
(1896) 161 Q.O. 240; LaWopWii t. CoaWq Jloqeaok N. rl., (1896) 161 Q.O.
646; Hlsfptfiia, aqY., N. rl. t. GakqsYhy, (1896) 101 Q.O. 677; SllZosbb
t. Ifppfppfmmf, (1896) 162 Q.O. 201; CfXplk t. Ifppffppfmmf (1896) 162
Q.O. 605; cWokfqz t. cataoiy, (1896) 163 Q.O. 119; DWkbloZ t. uWtfap,
(1896) 163 Q.O. 273; rltfkdqlk, aqY., Psokmfha NlWZ rl. t. OWkZbloZ,
(1896) 164 Q.O. 578; Oq. Hlsfp, aqY., N. rl. t.  IWqeavp, (1897) 165
Q.O. 1; CoWkZ HlZda, aqY. t. Jav KoiaWkp (1897) 166 Q.O. 143; cWiqfjloa
t. cWiqfjloa Pospq, aqY., rl., (1897) 168 Q.O. 673; rfqy N. rl. t.
rfqfzakp Oq. N. rl., (1897) 166 Q.O. 657; SWXWpe N. rl. t. uabfWkYa,
(1897) 167 Q.O. 88; OeWmiafde t. OWk Akdail, (1897) 167 Q.O. 646; Oq.
Akqelky BWiip SWqao Llvao rl. t. Oq. LWsi SWqao rlj'op (1897) 168 Q.O.
340; ulsdiWp t. GakqsYhy, (1897) 168 Q.O. 488; CWitapqlk, aqY., N. rl.
t. PawWp (1898) 170 Q.O. 226; Dlspqlk, aqY., N. rl. t. PawWp (1898) 170
Q.O. 243; SfiifWjp t. xddiapqlk (1898) 170 Q.O. 304; refYWdl, aqY., N.
rl. t. JaXoWphW, (1898) 170 Q.O. 57; Ifpplsof t. Isomey (1898) 170 Q.O.
78; Hlsfptfiia SWqao rl. t. GakqsYhy, (1898) 170 Q.O. 127; SWiiW SWiiW
t. SWiiW SWiiW SWqao rl, (1898) 172 Q.O. 1; IYrsiilsde t. RfodfkfW
(1898) 172 Q.O. 102; rlkkaYqfYsq Isq H. rl. t. OmoWqiay, (1899) 172 Q.O.
602; rfqfzakp OWt. cWkh t. KvakpHlol (1899) 173 Q.O. 636; HWha Oeloa,
aqY., N. rl. t. Ojfqe, (1899) 173 Q.O. 684; rltfkdqlk t. GakqsYhy,
(1899) 173 Q.O. 231; DakZaoplk cofZda rl. t. DakZaoplk (1899) 173 Q.O.
592; SWipe t. rlisjXsp, aqY., N. rl., (1900) 176 Q.O. 469; AZfolkZWYh
N. rl. t. Jav Uloh, (1900) 176 Q.O. 335; Jav Uloh H. Ekp. rl. t. roWtakp
(1900) 178 Q.O. 389; Hllhao t. IWykWoZ, (1900) 179 Q.O. 46; OqaWokp t.
IfkkaplqW. (1900) 179 Q.O. 223; iiifklfp rakq. N. rl. t. AZWjp, (1901)
180 Q.O. 28; Oq. LWsi CWp Hfdeq rl. t. Oq. LWsi, (1901) 181 Q.O. 142;
NaZ Nftao RWiiay JWq. cWkh t. roWfd, (1901) 181 Q.O. 548; caZbloZ t.
xWpqaok ciZd. aqY., ApplY. (1901) 161 Q.O. 227; Gklwtfiia Eolk rl. t.
DWoXfplk, (1901) 183 Q.O. 13; Koo t. CfijWk, (1902) 183 Q.O. 278; Sfiplk
t. Epajfkdao, (1902) 185 Q.O. 55; RfYhpXsod SWqao-Slohp rl. t.
RfYhpXsod, (1902) 185 Q.O. 65; DWkltao JWq. cWkh t. Ilypap (1902) 188
Q.O. 181; Jloqeaok rakq. N. rl. t. IWoyiWkZ, (1902) 187 Q.O. 256;
Kpehlpe SWqaovlohp rl. t. Kpehlpe (1903) 187 Q.O. 437; ufWjlkZ Cisa rl.
t. Q.O. Cisa rl. (1903) 187 Q.O. 611; SaXao t. NldWk, (1903) 188 Q.O.
10; ciWYhpqlka t. Ifiiao, (1903) 188 Q.O. 189; SWddlkao t. BiWYh, (1903)
188 Q.O. 595; KvakpXlol t. KvakpXlol SWqaovlohp rl., (1903) 191 Q.O.
358; SfpYlkpfk, aqY., N. rl. t. Llvaop, (1903) 191 Q.O. 319; uamlpfq
cWkh t. BoWkhbloq, (1903) 191 Q.O. 499; rfqfzakp' cWkh t. LWohao, (1904)
192 Q.O. 73; OqWkfpiWsp rlskqy t. OWk FlWnsfk, aqY., rWkWi, aqY., rl.,
(1904) 192 Q.O. 201. 
(39) IYrsiilYe t. IWoyiWkZ, (1819) 4 SeaWq. Q.O. 316; CfXXlkp t. KdZak
(1824) 9 SeaWq. Q.O. 1; colvk t. IWoyiWkZ, (1827) 12 SeaWq. Q.O. 419;
IWdao t. CofjW (1850) 8 Dlv. Q. O. 490; rlliay t. clWoZ lb SWoZakp,
(1851) 12 Dlv. Q.O. 209; Aijy t. rWifblokfW. (1860) 24 Dlv. Q.O. 169;
HfYakpa PWw rWpap (1866) 5 SWii. Q.O. 462; roWkZWii t. JatWZW. (1867)
6 SWii. Q.O. 35; SWofkd t. IlXfia, (1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 110, SllZosbb t.
LWoeWj, (1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 123; Dfkplk t. Hlqq (1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 148;
OqWqa PlkkWda PWw rWpap (1870) 12 SWii.Q.O. 204; OqWqa PWw lk NWfivWy
Colpp NaYafmqp (1872) 15 SWii. Q.O. 284; EkjWk OqaWjpefm rl. t. Pfkhao
(1876) 94 Q.O. 238 rllh t. LakkpyitWkfW (1878) 97 Q.O. 566; Galhsh
Jloqeaok Hfka LWYhaq rl. t. Galhsh, (1877) 95 Q.O. 80; Lalmia t.
rljmWdkfa CakaoWia PoWkpWqiWkqfnsa, (1882) 107 Q.O. 69; Psokao t.
IWoyiWkZ, (1882) 107 Q.O. 38; colvk R. Dlspqlk, (1885) 114 Q.O. 622;
rla. t. xooli (1886) 116 Q.O. 517; Psomfk t. csodapp, (1886) 117 Q.O.
504; LfqqpXsod, aqY., rlWi rl. t. cWqap (1895) 156 Q.O. 677; LfqqpXsod,
aqY., rlWi rl. t. HlsfpfWkW, (1895) 156 Q.O. 500; OYlqq t. ulkWiZ,
(1897) 165 Q.O. 58; LWqWmpYl CsWkl rl. t. Jloqe rWolifkW clWoZ lb
AdofYsiqsoa, (1898) 171 Q.O. 345; IWy t. Jav KoiaWkp (1900) 178 Q.O.
406; ulliay t. Q.O., (1901) 193 Q.O. 161; rlokaii t. rlyka, (1904) 192
Q.O. 418; AjaofYWk Oqaai aqY., rl. t. OmaaZ, (1904) 192 Q.O. 600. 
   "Loflo ql qea WZlmqflk lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk qea OqWqap WqqajmqaZ ql
oadsiWqa YljjaoYa, WkZ qeay Wipl iatfaZ Zsqfap lk fjmloqp WkZ awmloqp
WkZ Zsqfap lb qlkkWda, WkZ fq vWp qea ajXWooWppjjakqp dolvfkd lsq lb
psYe oadsiWqflkp WkZ YlkbifYqfkd lXifdWqflkp vefYe jWfkiy iaZ ql qea
WXWkZlkjakq lb qea YlkbaZaoWqflk WkZ ql qea jloa maobaYq skflk skZao qea
moapakq rlkpqfqsqflk." OqWqa PlkkWda PWw rWpap (1870) 12 SWii. Q.O. 214.
Oaa Wipl colvk t. IWoyiWkZ (1827) 12 SeaWq. Q.O. 439.  
(40) Coaak t. cfZZia, (1823) 8 SeaWq. Q.O. 1; Lllia t. Biaadao (1837)
11 Laq. Q.O. 185; rlliay t. clWoZ lb SWoZakp (1851) 12 Dlv. Q.O. 299;
Laaqa t. IlodWk, (1873) 19 SWii. Q.O. 591; rWkklk t. Jav KoiaWkp, (1874)
20 SWii. Q.O. 577; ikjWk OqaWjpefm rl. t. Pfkhao, (1876) 94 Q.O. 238;
Seaaifkd. aqY., PoWkpm. rl. t. Seaaifkd. (1878) 99 Q.O. 273;
Jloqevapqaok Qkflk LWYhaq rl. t. Oq. Hlsfp (1870) 100 Q.O. 423; Galhsh
Jloqeaok Hfka LWYhaq rl. t. Galhsh, (1877) 95 Q.O. 80; RfYhpXsod t.
PlXfk, (1870) 100 Q.O. 410; rfkYfkkWqf, aqY., LWYhaq rl. t. rWqiaqqpXsod
(1881) 105 Q.O. 659; Sfddfkp Baooy rl. t. xWpq Oq. Hlsfp (1882) 107 Q.O.
365; LWohaopXsod. aqY., PoWkpm. rl. t. LWohaopXsod. (1882) 107 Q.O. 691;
Loappao R. Eiifklfp, (1886) 110 Q.O. 252; Q.O. 465; Dspa t.. Ciltao.
(1886) 119 Q.O. 543; MsWYefqW LWYhaq rl. t. Afhak. (1887) 121 Q.O. 444;
EkZfWkW t.  GakqsYhy. (1890) 130 Q.O. 479; RfodfkfW t. Pakkappaa (1893)
148 Q. O. 503; SeWoqlk t. Sfpa (1894) 153 Q.O. 155; Oq. Hlsfp aqY., N.
rl. t. FWjap (1896) 161 Q.O. 545. 
   "Hllhfkd Wq qea YiWspa [fk qea BaZaoWi rlkpqfqsqflk] fk vefYe qea
qaojp `YljmWYq' lo `Wdoaajakq'WmmaWo, fq fp atfZakq qeWq qea molefXfqflk
fp ZfoaYqaZ ql qea blojWqflk lb Wky YljXfkWqflk qakZfkd ql qea fkYoaWpa
lb mlifqfYWi mlvao fk qea OqWqap, vefYe jWy akYolWYe smlk lo fkqaobaoa
vfqe qea gspq psmoajWYy lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap." RfodfkfW t. Pakkappaa
(1893) 148 Q.O. 519. 
(41) BfaiZ t. riWoh (1892) 143 Q.O. 649; refpelij t. CalodfW 
(1793) 2 uWii. Q.O. 419; HafqakpZlobao t. SaXX (1857) 20 Dlv. 
Q.O. 176; xw m. OfaXliZ, (1879) 100 Q.O. 371; Ek oa Coaak, 
(1890) 134 Q.O. 377; IYLeaoplk t. ciWYhao, (1892) 146 Q.O. 1. 
   "rlkdoapp fp ajmlvaoaZ ql Zaqaojfka qea qfja lb Yellpfkd qea aiaYqlop
WkZ qea ZWy lk vefYe qeay Woa ql dfta qeafo tlqap, vefYe fp oansfoaZ ql
Xa qea pWja ZWy qeolsdelsq qea QkfqaZ OqWqap, Xsq lqeaovfpa qea mlvao
WkZ gsofpZfYqflk lb qea OqWqa fp awYispfta, vfqe qea awYamqflk lb qea 
moltfpflkp Wp ql qea ksjXao lb aiaYqlop WkZ qea fkaifdfXfifqy lb YaoqWfk
maoplkp, pl boWjaZ qeWq YlkdoappflkWi WkZ baZaoWi fkbisakYa jfdeq Xa
awYisZaZ." IYLeaoplk t. ciWYhao,, (1892) 146 Q.O. 35. 
(42) Ekdifp t. OWfilo'p Oksd DWoXlso, (1830) 3 Laq. Q.O. 99. 
(43) DWyXsokp rWpa (1792) 2 uWii. Q.O. 410; refpelij t. CalodfW (1793)
12 uWii. Q.O. 410; CiWpp t. Pea Oillm caqpay (1794) 3 uWii. Q.O. 6; Q.O.
t. HW RakdaWkYa (1796) 3 uWii. Q.O. 297; Dliifkdpvloqe t. RfodfkfW.
(1798) 3 uWii. Q.O. 379; IlfpjWk t. Dfddfkplk, (1800) 4 uWii. Q.O. 12;
IWoXsoy t. IWZfplk, (1803) 1 roWkYe Q.O. 137; DamXsok t. xiizay, (1894)
2 roWkYe Q.O. 445; Q.O. t. Iloa, (1806) 3 roWkYe Q.O. 159; OqoWvXofZda
t. rsoqfp (1806) 3 roWkYe Q.O. 267; xw m. cliijWk (1807) 4 roWkYe Q.O.
75; Nlpa t. Dfjaiy, (1808) 4 roWkYe Q.O. 241; reWmmaZaiWfka v.
uaYeakWsw, (1806) 4 roWkYe Q.O. 306; Dlma Ekp. rl. t. clWoZjWk, (1800)
5 roWkYe Q.O. 57; Q.O. cWkh t. uataWsw, (1809) 5 roWkYe Q.O. 61; DlZdplk
t. clvaoXWkh, (1809) 5 roWkYe Q.O. 303; Kvfkdp t. JlovllZ, (1809) 5
roWkYe Q.O. 344; ulolsppaWs v. Q.O.m (1810) 6 roWkYe Q.O. 307; Q.O. t.
DsZplk, (1812) 7 roWkYe Q.O. 32; IWoqfk t. Dskqao, (1816) 1 SeaWq. Q.O.
304; rliplk t. Havfp, (1817) 2 SeaWq. Q.O. 377; Q.O. t. catWkp, (1818)
3 SeaWq. Q.O. 336; rleak t. RfodfkfW, (1821) 6 SeaWq. Q.O. 264; xw m.
t. GaWo- kay, (1822) 7 SeaWq. Q.O. 38; IWqqeavp t. VWka, (1822) 7 SeaWq.
Q.O. 164, Kpklok t. Q.O. cWkh, (1824) 9 SeaWq. Q.O. 738; Q.O. t. KoqadW
(1826) 11 SeaWq. Q.O. 467; AjaofYWk Ekp. rl. t. 358 cWiap rlqqlk, (1828)
1 Laq. Q.O. 511; FWYhplk t. PvakqyjWk, (1820) 2 Laq. Q.O. 136; reaolhaa
JWqflk t. CalodfW, (1831) 5 Laq. Q.O. 1; Jav Faopay t. Jav Uloh, (1831)
5 Laq. Q.O. 284; uWtfp t. LWYhWoZ, (1832) 6 Laq. Q.O. 41, (1833) 7 Laq.
Q.O. 270; Q.O. t. AooaZlkZl, (1832) 6 Laq. (Q.fO.) 601; coaaZilta t.
JfYliaq, (1833) 7 Laq. Q.O. 413; colvk t. Gaaka. (1834) 8 Laq. Q.O. 112;
uWtfp t. LWYhWoZ (1834) 8 Laq. Q.O. 312; Jav KoiaWkp t. ua AojWp (1835)
9. Laq. Q.O. 224; NelZa ipiWkZ t. IWppWYespaqqp (1838) 12 Laq. Q.O. 657;
AsdspqW cWkh t. xWoia, (1830) 13 Laq. Q.O. 510; rljjaoYfWi, aqY., cWkh
t. OilYljX, (1840) 14 Laq. Q.O. 60; OsyZWj t. colWZkWw (1840) 14 Laq.
Q.O. 07; Lofdd t. LakkpyitWkfW, (1842) 16 Laq. Q.O. 539; Hlsfptfiia,
aqY., N. rl. t. Haqplk, (1844) 2 Dlv. Q.O. 497; rWoy t. rsoqfp, (1845)
3 Dlv. Q.O. 236; SWofkd t. riWoha, (1847) 5 Dlv. Q.O. 441; Hsqeao t.
cloZak, (1849) 7 Dlv. Q.O. 1; OeaiZlk t. Ofii, (1850) 8 Dlv. Q.O. 441;
Pea Lolmaiiao Cakapaa refab t. Bfqzesde (1851) 12 Dlv. Q.O. 443; Boaqz
t. csii, (1851) 12 Dlv. Q.O. 466; Jatap t. OYlqq, (1851) 13 Dlv. Q.O.
208; LakkpyitWkfW t. Seaaifkd, aqY., cofZda rl., (1851) 13 Dlv. Q.O.
518; IWopeWii t. XWiqfjloa aqY., N. rl., (1853) 16 Dlv. Q.O. 314; Q.O.
t. Csqeofa, (1854) 17 Dlv. Q.O. 284; Ojfqe t. IWoyiWkZ, (1856) 18 Dlv.
Q.O. 71; Flkap t. HaWdsa, (1853) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 76; IsooWy t. DlXlhak HWkZ
aqY, rl., (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 272; DyZa t. Oqlka, (1857) 20 Dlv. Q.O.
170; Eotfkd t. IWopeWii. (1857) 20 Dlv. Q.O. 558; Bakk t. Dlijp, (1858)
21 Dlv. Q.O. 481; IloavllZ t. xkansfpq (1859) 23 Dlv. Q.O. 491; GakqsYhy
t. uakkfplk (1860) 24 Dlv. Q.O. 66; Kefl aqY., N. rl. t. Seaaiao (1861)
1 ciWYh Q.O. 286; Pea OqaWjao Oq. HWv. oakYa (1861) 1 ciWYh Q.O. 522;
Pea Lolmaiiao rljjaoYa, (1861) 1 ciWYh Q.O. 574; xw m. RWiiWkZfdeWj,
(1883) 1 SWii. Q.O. 243; xw m. IfiifdWk, (1868) 4 SWii. Q.O. 2; Pea
Ilpap PWyilo (1866) 4 SWii. Q.O. 411; Ifppfppfmmf t. Flekplk (1866) 4
SWii. Q.O. 475; Pea Dfka t. Poatlo, (1868) 4 SWii. Q.O. 553,-
LefiWZaimefW t. rliiaYqlo (1866) 5 SWii. Q.O. 720; CalodfW t. OqWkqlk,
(1867) 6 SWii. Q.O. 50; LWyka t. Dllh, (1868) 7 SWii. Q.O. 425; Pea
AifYfW, (1868) 7 SWii. Q.O. 571; xw m. Uaodao, (1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 85;
Jav xkdiWkZ Isq. IWofka Ekp. rl. t. uskeWj, (1870) 11 SWii. Q.O. 1;
RfodfkfW t. Sapq RfodfkfW (1870) 11 SWii. Q.O. 39; OspnsaeWkkW, aqY.,
RWiiay N., aqY., rl. t. ciWqYebloZ, (1870) 11 SWii. Q.O. 172; refYWdl,
aqY., N. rl. t. Sefqqlk, (1871) 13 SWii. Q.O. 270; PWoXia'p rWpa, (187i)
13 SWii. Q.O. 397; ciyav t. Q.O., (187i) 13 SWii. Q.O. 581; uWtfp t.
CoWy, (1872) 16 SWii. Q.O. 203; Oavfkd IWYe. rl.'p rWpa, (1873) 18 SWii.
Q.O. 553; Dlja Ekp. rl. t. Ilopa, (1874) 20 SWii. Q.O. 445; RWkkatWo t.
coyWkq, (1874) 21 SWii. Q.O. 41; Pea HlqqWvWkkW, (1874) 21 SWii. Q.O.
558; CWfkap t. Bsakqap (1875) 92 Q.O. 10; riWbbfk S. DlspajWk, (1876)
93 Q.O. 130; Isiiao t. ulvp, (1876) 94 Q.O. 444; ulyia t. rlkqfkakqWi
Ekp. rl., (1876) 94 Q.O. 535; Q.O. t. Qkflk LWY. N. rl., (1878) 98 Q.O.
589; Pakkappaa t. uWtfp, (1879) 100 Q.O. 257; xw m. clyZ, (1881) 105
Q.O. 647; cspe t. GakqsYhy, (1882) 107 Q.O. 110; LWohaopXsod, aqY.,
PoWkpm. rl. t. LWohaopXsod, (1882) 107 Q.O. 691; CoWZp t. Q.O. IloqdWda
rl., (1883) 108 Q.O. 477; refYWdl, aqY., N. rl. t. Sfddfkp Baooy rl,
(1893) 108 Q.O. 18; HlsfpfWkW t. Jav KoiaWkp, (1883) 108 Q.O. 568; xiifp
t. uWtfp, (1883) 109 Q.O. 485; rWoolii rlskqy t. Ojfqe, (1884) 111 Q.O.
556; Olsqeaok LWY. N. rl. t. rWifblokfW, (1888) 118 Q.O. 109; cWoolk t.
csokpfZa, (1887) 121 Q.O. 186; HfkYlik rlskqy t. Hskfkd. (1890) 133 Q.O.
529; DWkp t. HlsfpfWkW (1890) 134 Q.O. 1; Jloqe rWolifkW t. Pajmia,
(1890) 134 Q.O. 22; Ek oa JaWdia, (1890) 135 Q.O. 1; JWpesW, aqY., N.
rlom. t. clpqlk, aqY., N. rlom., (1890) 136 Q.O. 356; Flkap t. Q.O.,
(1890) 137 Q.O. 202; rllh rlskqy t. rWisjaq, aqY., rWkWi, aqY, rl.,
(1891) 138 Q.O. 635; IWkYeapqao t. IWppWYespaqqp, (1891) 139 Q.O. 240;
Ek oa CWokaqq, (1891) 141 Q.O. 1; Q.O. t. PawWp (1892) 143 Q.O. 821;
Olsqeaok LWY. N. rl. t. uakqlk, (1892) 146 Q.O. 202; rllha t. Ataoy,
(1893) 147 Q.O. 375; rWqap t. Aiiak, (1893) 149 Q.O. 451; IYJsiqy t.
rWifblokfW. (1893) 149 Q.O. 645; Ek oa Pyiao. (1893) 149 Q.O. 104;
Javmloq Hfdeq rl. t. Javmloq, (1894) 151 Q.O. 527; Jav Uloh, aqY., N.
rl. t. cofpqli, (1894) 151 Q.O. 650; EpoaWi t. Aoqeso, (1894) 152 Q.O.
355; IfYefdWk t. Bifkq, aqY., N rl., (1894) 152 Q.O. 363; Jav KoiaWkp
t. cakgWjfk, (1894) 153 Q.O. 411; IlXfia, aqY., N. rl. t. Pakkappaa,
(1894) 153 Q.O. 486; NaWdWk t. BWojaop' H. & P. rl., (1894) 154 Q.O.
362; EkqaopqWqa rljjaoYa rljjfppflk t. cofjplk. (1894) 154 Q.O. 447;
Lisjiay t. IWppWYespaqqp (1894) 166 Q.O. 461; AkZoavp t. OvWoqz (1895)
156 Q.O. 272; Oq. Hlsfp aqY., N. rl. t. Cfii, (1895) 156 Q.O. 649;
Oqatakp t. JfYeli (1895) 157 Q.O. 370; Ek oa uaXp (1895) 158 Q.O. 564;
rakqoWi HWkZ rl. t. HWfZiay, (1895) 159 Q.O. 103; Bliplj t. Plvkpefm
Jfkaqy-Ofw, (i895) 159 Q.O. 611; HWfkd t. Nfdkay, (1896) 160 Q.O. 531;
Oq. Hlsfp, aqY., N. rl. t. FWjap, (1896) 161 Q.O. 545; SllZosbb t.
Ifppfppfmmf (1896) 162 Q.O. 291; BWiiXollh EoofdWqflk ufpq. t. coWZiay,
(1896) 164 Q.O. 112; OYlqq t. ulkWiWZ (1897) 165 Q.O. 107; NlXaoqplk t.
cWiZvfk, (1897) 105 Q.O. 275; refYWdl aqY., N. rl. t. refYWdl, (1897)
168 Q.O. 226; Blopyqe t. DWjjlkZ (1897) 166 Q.O. 506; Kwiay OqWta rl.
t. csqiao rlskqy, (1897) 166 Q.O. 648; Ek oa Hakklk, (1897) 166 Q.O.
548; rfqy N. rl. t. rfqfzakp' Oq. N. rl., (1897) 166 Q.O. 557; ulsdiWp
t. GakqsYhy, (1897) 168 Q.O. 488; Ifiiao t. rlokvWii N. rl., (1897) 168
Q.O. 131; cWhao t. CofYa, (1898) 169 Q.O. 284; Ojyqe t. Ajap (1898) 169
Q.O. 466; cWYhsp t. Bloq Oq. Qkflk uamlq rl.. (1898) 169 Q.O. 557;
Pfkpiay t. AkZaoplk, (1898) 171 Q.O. 101; SWiiW SWiiW t. SWiiW SWiiW
SWqao rl., (1898) 172 Q.O. 1; Coaak cWy, aqY., rWkWi rl. t. LWqqak LWmao
rl., (1898) 172 Q.O. 58; Iayao t. NfYejlkZ (1898) 172 Q.O. 82;
IYrsiilsde t. RfodfkfW, (1898) 172 Q.O. 102; Bfqqp s. IYCeaa (1899) 172
Q.O. 516; uavay t. uap Ilfkap (1899) 173 Q.O. 193; JfYli t. Ajap, (1899)
173 Q.O. 500; rltfkdqlk t. GakqsYhy, (1899) 173 Q.O. 231, HW AXoW Ofitao
Ifk. rl. t. Q.O.. (1899) 175 Q.O. 423; HlsfpfWkW t. PawWp (1900) 176
Q.O. 1; SefqjWk t. KwbloZ JWq. cWkh, (1900) 176 Q.O. 559; DWkYlYh JWq.
cWkh t. BWoksj, (1900) 176 Q.O. 640; rWoqao t. PawWp (1900) 177 Q.O.
442; Ojfqe t. Naatap (E900) 178 Q.O. 436; Sapqaok Qkflk Pai. rl. t. Akk
AoXlo N. rl.. (1900) 178 Q.O. 239; Sfiay t. Ofkhiao, (1900) 170 Q.O. 58;
Ifpplsof t. Eiifklfp (1901) 180 Q.O. 208, xWpqaok ciZd., aqY.. ApplY.
t. Saiifkd. (1901) 181 Q.O. 47; ulliay R. Q.O., (1901) 182 Q.O. 222;
PsiilYh t. IsitWka (1902) 184 Q.O. 497; LWqqlk t. coWZy. (1902) 184 Q.O.
608; GWkpWp t. rliloWZl, (1902) 185 Q.O. 125; OvWbbloZ t. Pajmiaqlk,
(1902) 185 Q.O. 487; IlXfia PoWkpm. rl. t. IlXfia. (1903) 187 Q.O. 470;
AkZoavp t. AkZoavp. (1903) 188 Q.O. 14; Dllhao t. Hlp Akdaiap, (1903)
188 Q.O. 314; rsjjfkdp t. refYWdl, (1903) 188 Q.O. 410; OYeWabao t.
Saoifkd. (1903) 188 Q.O. 516; Pea NlWklha (1903) 189 Q.O. 185; uaqolfq,
aqY., N. rl. t. KpXlok (1903) 189 Q.O. 383; LWqqaoplk t. XWohxsZloW
(1903) 190 Q.O. 169; DlvWoZ t. Biajfkd, (1903) 191 Q.O. 126; AoXsYhia
X. ciWYhXsok, (1903) 191 Q.O. 405; uamlpfq cWkh X. BoWkhbloq (1903) 191
Q.O. 499; OmakYao t. usmiWk Ofih rl. (1903) 191 Q.O. 526; SWXWpe N. rl.
t. LaWoYa, (1904) 192 Q.O. 179; Nldaop t. AiWXWjW (1904) 192 Q.O. 226;
Olsqe uWhlqW t. Jloqe rWolifkW (1904) 192 Q.O. 286; cWkhaop Isq.
rWpsWiqy rl. t. IfkkaWmlifp, aqY., N. rl. (1904) 192 Q.O. 371; OmoaYhaip
OsdWo Nabfkfkd rl. t. IYrEWfk (1904) 192 Q.O. 397. 
(44) Q.O. t. Ekpsodakqp, (1795) 2 uWii. Q.O. 335; Q.O. t. IfqYeaii
(1795) 2 uWii. Q.O. 348; xw m. cliijWk, (1807) 4 roWkYe Q.O. 75; csoo'p
PofWi, 4 roWkYe Q.O. 469. 
   "Pl moatakq qea mlppfXfifqy lb qelpa YWiWjfqfap vefYe oapsiq bolj qea
awqakpflk lb qoaWplk ql lbbakpap lb jfklo fjmloqWkYa, qeWq doaWq
bskZWjakqWi iWv vefYe Zabfkap WkZ ifjfqp qea tWoflsp ZamWoqjakqp lb lso
dltaokjakq eWp dftak W osia lk qea psXgaYq Xlqe ql qea iadfpiWqsoa WkZ
qea Ylsoqp lb AjaofYW, vefYe kafqeao YWk Xa maojfqqa4 ql qoWkpYakZ.
`PoaWqflk WdWfkpq qea QkfqaZ OqWqap peWii Ylkpfpq lkiy fk iatyfkd vWo
WdWfkpq qeaj, lo fk WZeaofkd ql qeafo akajfap. dftfkd qeaj WfZ WkZ
Yljbloq.'" Lao Io. refab FspqfYa IWopeWii, Ek xw m. ulEiHkWk, (1807) 4
roWkYe Q.O. 128. Oaa Wipl Q.O. t. Dlwfa, (1808) E LWfka Q.O. 265. 
   "Ek qea aWoifao maoflZp lb xkdifpe efpqloy, qea gsZdap vaoa lbqak qea
mifWkq qllip lb qea hfkd, WkZ awaoYfpaZ qea mlvao lb mskfpefkd blo
Y-lkpqosYqfta qoaWplkp, skZao YfoYsjpqWkYap qea jlpq oatliqfkd WkZ
doaWqiy ql qea lmmoappflk lb fkklYakq maoplkp. Pea vfpa WkZ pWdWYflsp
boWjaop lb lso rlkpqfqsqflk eWta abbaYqsWiiy dsWoZaZ WdWfkpq psYeWXspap
lb mlvao, Xy ZaYiWofkd qeaoa peWii Xa kl YlktfYqflk blo qefp efde Yofja
lk jaoa pspmfYflk lo lk mollb lb Wky bWYq vefYe fp klq Wk ltaoq WYq lb
qoaWplk apqWXfifpeaZ Xy qvl vfqkappap. reWoda ql CoWkZ Fsoy, (1861) 1
clkZ Q.O. 610. 
 
(45) cfdailv t. Blooapq, (1869) 9 SWii. Q.O. 330; uWy t. IfYls, (1873)
18 SWii. Q.O. 156; xw m. HWkda, (1873) 18 SWii. Q.O. 163; SWiiWYe t. RWk
NfpvfYh, (1876) 92 Q.O. 202; Q.O. t. uskkfkdqlk. (1892) 146 Q.O. 338.

   "SeWq vWp fkqakZaZ Xy qea YlkpqfqsqflkWi moltfpflk fp boaa bolj ZlsXq.
Ek xkdiWkZ, WqqWfkZaop lb qoaWplk vlohaZ Yloosmqflk lb XillZ WkZ
maomaqsWi blobafqsoa lb qea apqWqa lb qea maoplk WqqWfkqaZ, ql qea
Zfpfkeaofplk lb efp eafop, lo lb qelpa vel vlsiZ lqeaovfpW Xa efp eafop.
Pesp fkklYakq YefiZoak vaoa jWZW ql psbbao XaYWspa lb qea lbbakpa lb
qeafo WkYapqlo. Seak qea BaZaoWi rlkpqfqsqflk vWp boWjaZ, qefp vWp baiq
ql Xa W doaWq eWoZpefm, WkZ atak oWkh fkgspqfYa. Blo qefp oaWplk, fq vWp
loZoWfkaZ qeWq kl WqqWfkZao lb qoaWplk pelsiZ vloh Yloosmqflk lb XillZ
lo blobafqsoa, awYamq Zsofkd qea ifba lb qea maoplk WqqWfkqaZ." SWiiWYe
t. RWk NfpvfYh, (1875) 92 Q.O. 210. 
(46) Ifiip t. usoyaa (1813) 7 roWkYe Q.O. 481; DWjmqlk  t. I'rlkkai 
(1818) 3 SeaWq. Q.O. 234; IWyeav t. PeWqYeao (1821) 6 SeaWq Q.O. 129;
uWoXy t. IWyao, (1825) 10 SeaWq. Q.O. 465; Q.O. t. AjaZy, (1826) 11
SeaWq. Q.O. 302; rWiZvaii t. rWoofkdqlk, (1835) 9 Laq. Q.O. 86;
I'xijlyia t. rleak (1830) 13 Laq. Q.O. 312, AsdspqW cskh t. xWoia,
(1839) 13 Laq. Q.O. 519; AiWXWjW OqWqa cWkh t. uWiqlk, (1850) 9 Dsv.
Q.O. 622; u'Aoay t. GaqYesj (1850) 11 Dlv. Q.O. 165; reofpqjWp t.
Nsppaii, (1866) 5 SWii. Q.O. 200; Coaak t. RWk csphfoh, (1868) 7 SWii.
Q.O. 130; LWsi t. RfodfkfW, (1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 168; clWoZ lb LsXifY
Slohp t. rlisjXfW rsiiada (1873) 17 SWii. Q.O. 521; Peljmplk t. SefqjWk
(1873) 18 SWii. Q.O. 457; Lakklyao t. Jabb (1877) 95 Q.O. 714; clkWmWoqa
t. AmmaWi PWw rq.. (1882) 104 Q.O. 692; NlXaoqplk t. LfYhoaii, (1883)
100 Q.O. 608; colvk t. Dlspqlk (1885) 114 Q.O. 622; DWkiay t.. ulkldesa,
(1885) 116 Q.O. 1; NakWsZ t. AXXlqq (1886) 116 Q.O. 277; refYWdl, aqY.,
N. rl. t. Sfddfkp Baooy rl., (1887) 119 Q.O. 615; cloao t. reWmjWk
(1887) 110 Q.O. 587; rlia t. rskkfkdeWj (1890) 133 Q.O. 107; cilskq t.
SWihao (1890) 134 Q.O. 607; Ofjjlkp t. OWsi (1891) 138 Q.O. 439;
NaykliZp t. OqlYhqlk (1891) 140 Q.O. 254; rWomakqao t. OqoWkda (189i)
141 Q.O. 87; Dskqfkdqlk t. Aqqofii, (1892) 146 Q.O. 657; Ciakk t. CWoqe,
(1893) 147 Q.O. 360; HWfkd t. Nfdkay, (1896) 160 Q.O. 531; refYWdl,
aqY., N. rl. t. Oqsoj, (1890) 174 Q.O. 710; PelojWkk t. BoWja, (1900)
178 Q.O. 350; DWkYlYh JWq. cWkh t. BWoksj, (1900) 176 Q.O. 640; riWoha
t. riWoha, (1900) 178 Q.O. 186; Sfihap rlskqy t. rliao, (1901) 180 Q.O.
506; S. S. rWodfii rl. t. IfkkaplqW, (1901) 180 Q.O. 452; Flekplk t. Jav
Uloh H. Ekp. rl., (1903) 187 Q.O. 491; AkZoavp t. AkZoavp, (1903) 188
Q.O. 14; ciWYhpqlka t. Ifiiao, (1903) 188 Q.O. 180; Bfkkay t. Csy (1903)
189 Q.O. 335; SWXWpe N. rl. t. BiWkkfdWk, (1904) 192 Q.O. 29; CaojWkk
OWt., aqY., OlY. t. ulojfqzao, (1904) 192 Q.O. 125; SaZZfkd t. Iayao,
(1904) 192 Q.O. 573.  
(47) Q.O. cWkh t. uataWsw, (1809) 5 roWkYe Q.O. 61; CWppfap t. cWiilk,
(1832) 6 Laq. Q.O. 761; NelZa EpiWkZ t. IWppWYespaqqqp (1838) 12 Laq.
Q.O. 657; AsdspqW cWkh t. xWoia (1839) 13 Laq. Q.O. 519; Illoa t.
Eiifklfp, (1852) 14 Dlv. Q.O. 13; rlkkao t. xiiflqq, (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O.
591; uoaZ OYlqq t. OWkZbloZ (1856) 19 Dlv. Q.O. 393; roWkZWii t. JatWZW
(1867) 6 SWii. Q.O. 35; SllZosbb t. LWoeWj, (1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 123;
LWsi t. RfodfkfW (1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 168; ulvkeWj t. AiawWkZofW (1869)
10 SWii. Q.O. 173; Hftaomlli Ekp. rl. t. IWppWYespaqqp (1870) 10 SWii.
Q.O. 566; SWoZ t. IWoyiWkZ, (1870) 12 SWii. Q.O. 418; OiWsdeqao-Dlspa
rWpap (1872) 16 SWii. Q.O. 36; coWZvaii t. OqWqa, (1872) 18 SWii. Q.O.
130; reajskd rWkWi cWkh t. Hlvaoy, (1876) 93 Q.O. 72; IYroaWZy t.
RfodfkfW, (1876) 104 Q.O. 391; LefiWZaimefW Bfoa ApplY. t. Jav Uloh,
(1886) 119 Q.O. 110; LajXfkW rlkpli. Ofitao Ifk., aqY., rl. t.
LakkpyitWkfW (1888) 125 Q.O. 181; Gfjjfpe t. cWii, (1889) 129 Q.O. 217;
rlia t. rskkfkdeWj, (1890) 133 Q.O. 107; IWkYeapqao t. IWppWYespaqqp,
(1891) 139 Q.O. 240; LfqqpXsod, aqY., rlWi rl. t. cWqap, (1895) 156 Q.O.
577; RWkYa t. S. A. RWkZaoYlYh rl., (1898) 170 Q.O. 438; ciWha t.
IYriskd, (1898) 172 Q.O. 239; SfiifWjp t. BaWop, (1900) 179 Q.O. 270;
PoWtaiiaop, Ekp. rl. t. rlkkaYqfYsq, (1902) 165 Q.O. 364; reWZvfYh t.
Gaiiay, (1903) 187 Q.O. 540; ufWjlkZ Cisa rl. t. Q.O. Cisa rl., (1903)
187 Q.O. 611; ciWYhpqlka t. Ifiiao, (1903) 188 Q.O. 189; Akdil-AjaofYWk
Loltfpflk rl. t. uWtfp Loltfpflk rl., (1903) 191 Q.O. 373. 
   "Pea rlkpqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap ZaYiWoap qeWq qea Yfqfzakp lb
aWYe OqWqa peWii Xa akqfqfaZ ql Wii qea moftfiadap WkZ fjjskfqfap lb
Yfqfzakp fk qea pataoWi OqWqap. AkZ Wiqelsde qeapa moftfiadap WkZ
fjjskfqfap, blo doaWqao pWbaqy, Woa miWYaZ skZao qea dsWoZfWkpefm lb qea
dakaoWi dltaokjakq, pqfii qea OqWqap jWy Xy qeafo iWvp WkZ fk qeafo
qofXskWip molqaYq WkZ akbloYa qeaj. Peay eWta klq lkiy qea mlvao, Xsq
fq fp W Zsqy akglfkaZ smlk qeaj Xy qefp moltfffflk fk qea rlkpqfqsqflk."
Lao Io. FspqfYa PWkay, fk Lofdd t. LakkpyitWkfW (1842) 16 Laq. Q.O. 629.

(48) Dlijap t. Fakkfplk, (1840) 14 Laq. Q.O. 540; GakqsYhy t. uakkfplk,
(1860) 24 Dlv. Q.O. 66; PWyilo t. PWfkqlo, (1872) 16 SWii. Q.O. 366;
rWoolii rlskqy t. Ojfqe (1884) 111 Q.O. 556; xw m. Naddai (1885) 114
Q.O. 642; IWelk t. FspqfYa (1888) 127 Q.O. 700; HWpYaiiap t. CalodfW,
(1893) 148 Q.O. 637; Qqqao t. BoWkhifk. (1899) 172 Q.O. 416. 
(49) Lofdd t. LakkpyitWkfW, (1842) 16 Laq. Q.O. 639; Flkap t. RWk VWkZq,
(1847) 6 Dlv. Q.O. 215; OqoWZao t. CoWeWj (1850) 10 Dlv. Q.O. 82, Illoa
t. Eiifklfp (1852) 14 Dlv. Q.O. 13; uoaZ OYlqq t. OWkZbloZ, (1856) 19
Dlv. Q.O. 393; AXiajWk t. cllqe, (1858) 21 Dlv. Q.O. 506., 
   "xtaoy OqWqa eWp Wk skZlsXqaZ ofdeq ql Zaqaojfka qea pqWqsp, lo
ZljapqfY WkZ plYfWi YlkZfqflk, lb qea maoplkp ZljfYfiaZ vfqefk fqp
qaoofqloy; awYamq fkplbWo Wp qea mlvaop lb qea OqWqap fk qefp oapmaYq
Woa oapqoWfkaZ, lo Zsqfap WkZ lXifdWqflkp fjmlpaZ lk qeaj, Xy qea
rlkpqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap." OqoWZao t. CoWeWj, (1850) 10
Dlv.Q.O. 93. 
(50) Hsqeao t. cloZak. (1840) 7 Dlv. Q.O. 1; PawWp t. Sefqa. (1868) 7
SWii. Q.O. 700; Ek oa uskYWk (1891) 139 Q.O. 449; PWyilo t. caYheWj,
(1900) 178 Q.O. 548. 
(51)    "Eq vWp lka lb qea lXgaYqflkp jlpq paoflspiy sodaZ WdWfkpq qea
kav Ylkpqfqsqflk Xy qelpa vel lmmlpaZ fqp oWqfbfYWqflk Xy qea OqWqap,
qeWq fq YlkqWfkaZ kl blojWi cfii lb Nfdeqp. (BaZaoWifpq. Jl.iwwwft.) AkZ
qea OqWqa lb RfodfkfW WYYljmWkfaZ eao oWqfbfYWqflk Xy qea oaYljakZWqflk
lb Wk WjakZjakq ajXlZyfkd psYe W Xfii. (3 xiiflq'p uaXWqap, 661.) Pea
baaifkd lk qefp psXgaYq iaZ ql qea WZlmqflk lb qea bfopq qak WjakZjakqp
ql qeWq fkpqosjakq Wq lka qfja, peloqiy Wbqao qea dstaokjakq, vWp
lodWkfzaZ. Peapa Woa Wii ZapfdkaZ ql lmaoWqa Wp oaqfqoWfkqp lk qea
dakaoWi dltaokjakq, WkZ jlpq lb qeaj blo qea molqaYqflk lb moftWqa
ofdeqp lb maoplkp WsZ molmaoqy. JlqvfqpqWkZfkd qefp oamolWYe, elvatao,
qeaoa Woa jWky moltfpflkp fk qea lofdfkWi fkpqosjakq lb qefp iWqqao
YeWoWYqao." Gofkd t. Ifpplsof (1882) 107 Q.O. 226. 
(52) Paooaqq t. PWyilo, (1815) 9 roWkYe Q.O. 43; RfZWi t. LefiWZaimefW,
(1844) 2 Dlv. Q.O. 127; xw m. CWoiWkZ, (1866) 4 SWii. Q.O. 333; Q.O. t.
rosfhpeWkh (1875) 92 Q.O. 542; NaykliZp t. Q.O. (1878) 98 Q.O. 145;
Omfap t. Eiifklfp (1887) 123 Q.O. 131; uWtfp t. caWplk, (1890) 133 Q.O.
333; xfiakXaYhao t. Liyjlsqe rlskqy, (1890) 134 Q.O. 31; resoYe lb Fapsp
reofpq t. Q.O., (1890) 138 Q.O. 1; Ek oa NWmfao (1892) 143 Q.O. 110;
Dlokao t. Q.O., (1892) 143 Q.O. 207; coWZbfaiZ t. NlXaoqp (1899) 175
Q.O. 291. 
(53)    "Pea ofdeq lb qea malmia maWYaWXiy ql WppajXia blo qefp msomlpa
lb maqfqflkfkd rlkdoapp blo W oaZoapp lb dofatWkYap, lo blo Wkyqefkd
aipa YlkkaYqaZ vfqe qea mlvaop lo qea Zsqfap lb qea kWqflkWi dltaokjakq,
fp Wk WqqofXsqa lb kWqflkWi Yfqfzakpefm, WkZ, Wp psYe, skZao qea
molqaYqflk lb, WkZ dsWoWkqaaZ Xy, qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. Pea taoy fZaW lb
W dltaokjakq, oamsXifYWk fk bloj, fjmifap W ofdeq lk qea mWoq lb fqp
Yfqfzakp ql jaaq maWYaWXiy blo YlkpsiqWqflk fk oapmaYq ql msXifY WbbWfop
WkZ ql maqfqflk blo W oaZoapp lb dofatWkYap." Q.O. t. rosfhpeWkh (1875)
92 Q.O. 552. 
(54) Loappao t. Eiifklfp (1886) 116 Q.O. 252; Omfap t. Eiifklfp (1887)
123 Q.O. 131; xfiakXaahao t. Liyjlsqe rlskqy, (1890) 134 Q.O. 31. 
   "Pefp fp klq W ofdeq doWkqaZ Xy qea rlkpqfqsqflk. Jafqeao fp fq fk Wky
jWkkao ZamakZakq smlk qeWq fkpqosjakq blo fqp awfpqakYa. Pea OaYlkZ
AjakZjakq ZaYiWoap qeWq fq peWii klq Xa fkbofkdaZ; Xsq qefp, Wp eWp Xaak
paak, jaWkp kl jloa qeWk qeWq fq peWii klq Xa fkbofkdaZ Xy rlkdoapp.
Pefp fp lka lb qea WjakZjakqp qeWq eWp kl lqeao abbaYq qeWk ql oapqofYq
qea mlvaop lb qea kWqflkWi dltaokjakq, iaWtfkd qea malmia ql illh blo
qeafo molqaYqflk WdWfkpq Wky tfliWqflk Xy qeafo baiilv-Yfqfzakp lb qea
ofdeqp fq oaYldkfzap, ql veWq fp YWiiaZ, fk Pea rfqy lb Jav Uloh t.
Ifik, (1837) 11 Laq. Q.O. 139, qea mlvaop vefYe oaiWqa ql jaoaiy
jskfYfmWi iadfpiWqflk, lo veWq vWp, maoeWmp, jloa molmaoiy YWiiaZ
fkqaokWi mlifYa,' `klq psooakZaoaZ lo oapqoWfkaZ' Xy qea rlkpqfqsqflk
lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap." Q.O. t. rosfhpeWkh, (1875) 92 Q.O. 553. 
(55) Ojfqe t. IWoyiWkZ, (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 71; IsooWy t. DlXlhak HWkZ,
aqY., rl., (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 272; xw m. IfiifdWk (1866) 4 SWii. Q.O.
2; clyZ t. Q.O., (1886) 116 Q.O. 616; Omfap t. Eiifklfp (1887) 123 Q.O.
131; xfiakXaahao t. Liyjlsqe rlskqy (1890) 134 Q.O. 31; Blkd Usa Pfkd
t. Q.O., (1893) 149 Q.O. 608; EkqaopqWqa rljjaoYa rljjfppflk t. cofjplk,
(1894) 154 Q.O. 447; Ek oa reWmjWk, (1897) 166 Q.O. 661; AZWjp t. Jav
Uloh, (1904) 192 Q.O. 585. 
(56) Pea paYsofqy fkqakZaZ ql Xa dsWoWkqapZ Xy qea Blsoqe AjakZjakq
WdWfkpq 
volkdbsi paWoYe WkZ pafzsoa fp ZapfdkaZ ql moatakq tfliWqflkp lb moftWqa
paYsofqy fk maoplk WkZ molmaoqy WkZ skiWvbsi fktWpflk lb qea pWkYqfqy
lb qea elja lb qea Yfqfzak Xy lbbfYaop lb qea iWv, WYqfkd skZao
iadfpiWqfta lo gsZfYfWi pWkYqflk, WkZ ql dfta oajaZy WdWfkpq psYe
spsomWqflkp veak WqqajmqaZ. csq qea xkdifpe WkZ kaWoiy Wii lb qea
AjaofYWk YWpap eWta ZaYifkaZ ql awqakZ qefp ZlYqofka ql qea awqakq lb
awYisZfkd qapqfjlky vefYe eWp Xaak lXqWfkaZ Xy psYe jaWkp, fb fq fp
lqeaovfpa Yljmaqakq." AZWjp t. Jav Uloh, (19K4) 192 Q.O. 598. 
(57) Q.O. t. Laoaz (1824) 9 SeaWq. Q.O. 579; cWoolk t. cWiqfjloa. (1833)
7 Laq. Q.O. 243; Blw t. Kefl (1847) 5 Dlv. Q.O. 410; Sapq Nftao cofZda
rl. t. ufw, (1848) 6 Dlv. Q.O. 507; IfqYeaii t. DWojlky (1851) 13 Dlv.
Q.O. 115; Illoa t. Eiifklfp (1852) 14 Dlv. Q.O. 13; IsooWy t. DlXlhak
HWkZ, aqY., rl., (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 272; uykap t. Dlltao, (1857) 20
Dlv. Q.O. 65; Sfqeaop t. csYhiay, (1857) 20 Dlv. Q.O. 84; CfijWk t.
OeaXlydWk (1862) 2 ciWYh Q.O. 510; xw m. IfiifdWk, (1866) 4 SWii. Q.O.
2; PvfqYeaii t. LakkpyitWkfW, (1868) 7 SWii. Q.O. 321; DamXsok t.
CofpvliZ, (1869) 8 SWii. Q.O. 603; Ifiiao t. Q.O., (1870) 11 SWii. Q.O.
268; HadWi PakZao rWpap (1870) 12 SWii. Q.O. 457; Lsjmaiiy t. Coaak cWy,
aqY., rWkWi rl., (1871) 13 SWii. Q.O. 166; KpXlok t. JfYeliplk, (187i)
13 SWii. Q.O. 654; xw m. HWkda (1873) 18 SWii. Q.O. 163; Glei t. Q.O.,
(1875) 91 Q.O. 367; uWtfZplk t. Jav KoiaWkp (1877) 96 Q.O. 97; Ofkhfkd
BskZ rWpap (1878) 99 Q.O. 700; HWkdbloZ t. Q.O., (1879) 101 Q.O. 341,
Gaiiy t. LfqqpXsode, (1881) 104 Q.O. 78; xw m. SWii (1882) 107 Q.O. 265;
Q.O. t. Flkap (1883) 109 Q.O. 513; Q.O. t. CoaWq BWiip Ibd. rl., (1884)
112 Q.O. 645; xw m. Sfiplk (1885) 114 Q.O. 417; clyZ t. Q.O., (1886) 116
Q.O. 616; IWYhfk t. Q.O., (1886) 117 Q.O. 348; xw m. cWfk (1887) 121
Q.O. 1; LWohfkplk t. Q.O., (1887) 121 Q.O. 281; Omfap t. Eiifklfp,
(1887) 123 Q.O. 131; rWiiWk t. Sfiplk (1888) 127 Q.O. 540; Q.O. t. ua
SWiq (1888) 128 Q.O. 393; IWkkfkd t. BoakYe, (1890) 133 Q.O. 186;
xfiakXaYhao t. Liyjlsqe rlskqy, (1890) 134 Q.O. 31; Hlsfptfiia, aqY. N.
rl. t. SllZplk (1890) 134 Q.O. 614; Ek oa Nlpp, (1891) 140 Q.O. 453;
rlskpaijWk t. DfqYeYlYh, (1892) 142 Q.O. 547; Ofjjlkp t. Q.O. (1891) 142
Q.O. 148; Pelofkdqlk t. Ilkqdljaoy (1893) 147 Q.O. 490; IlklkdWeaiW JWt.
rl. t. Q.O., (1893) 148 Q.O. 312; Blkd Usa Pfkd t. Q.O., (1893) 149 Q.O.
698; Haap t. Q.O. (1893) 150 Q.O. 476; IWoYeWkq t. LakkpyitWkfW N. rl.,
(1894) 153 Q.O. 380; HfkbloZ t. xiifplk, (1894) 155 Q.O. 503; Flekplk
t. OWyoa, (1895) 158 Q.O. 100; Ovaaq t. NaYeai (1895) 159 Q.O. 380;
colvk t. SWihao. (1896) 161 Q.O. 591; Slkd Sfkd t. Q.O., (1996) 163 Q.O.
228; PWiqlk t. IWyap (1896) 163 Q.O. 376; cWsjWk t. Nlpp, (1897) 167
Q.O. 648; Sfiplk t. HWjXaoq, (1898) 168 Q.O. 611; Q.O. t. Flfkq PoWbbfY
ApplY. (1898) 171 Q.O. 505; IWwvaii t. ulv (1900) 176 Q.O. 581; OYoWkqlk
t. Seaaiao, (1900) 170 Q.O. 141; IYulkWiZ t. IWppWYespaqqp (1901) 180
Q.O. 311; Jaaiy t. Dakhai, (1901) 180 Q.O. 109; BoakYe t. cWoXao ApmeWiq
LWtfkd rl., (1901) 181 Q.O. 324; Sfdeq t. uWtfZplk, (1901)181 Q.O. 371;
PlkWvWkZW t. Hylk (1901) 181 Q.O. 389; rWmfqWi rfqy uWfoy rl. t. Kefl
(1902) 183 Q.O. 238; DWkltao JWq. cWkh t. Ilypap (1902) 186 Q.O. 181;
uoayao t. Eiifklfp (1902) 187 Q.O. 71; Hlka Slib t. DfqYeYlYh (1903) 187
Q.O. 553; Q.O. t. HykWe (1903) 188 Q.O. 445; FWmWkapa EjjfdoWkq rWpa
(1903) 189 Q.O. 86; DWvWff t. IWkhfYef (1903) 190 Q.O. 197; caZbloZ t.
Q.O.. (1904) 192 Q.O. 217; csqqbfaiZ t. OqoWkWeWk (1904) 192 Q.O. 470;
AZWjp t. Jav Uloh, (1904) 192 Q.O. 585. 
(58) Oaa YWpap YfqaZ fk klqa 2, psmoW. 
(59) Oaa YWpap YfqaZ fk klqa 2, psmoW. 
(60) Oaa YWpap YfqaZ fk klqa 2, psmoW. 
(61) Oaa YWpap YfqaZ fk klqa 2, psmoW. 
(62) Q.O. t. rllifZda, (1816) 1 SeaWq. Q.O. 415; xw m. GaWokay, (1822)
7 SeaWq. Q.O. 38; Q.O. t. Ifiip, (1833) 7 Laq. Q.O. 142; cWoolk t.
cWiqfjloa, (1833) 7 Laq. Q.O. 243; Blw t. Kefl, (1847) 5 elv. Q.O. 410;
Sfqeaop t. csYhiay, (1857) 20 Dlv. Q.O. 84; xw m. IfiifdWk, (1866) 4
SWii. Q.O. 2; PvfqYeaii t. LakkpyitWkfW (1868) 7 SWii. Q.O. 321; Ifiiao
t. Q.O. (1870) 11 SWii. Q.O. 268; Q.O. t. rllh, (1872) 17 SWii. Q.O.
168; Q.O. t. rosfhpeWkh, (1875) 92 Q.O. 542; NaykliZp t. Q.O., (1878)
98 Q.O. 145; Omfap t. Eiifklfp, (1887) 123 Q.O. 131; collhp t. Ifpplsof,
(1888) 124 Q.O. 394; rWiiWk t. Sfiplk, (1898) 127 Q.O. 540; xaiakXaYhao
t. Liyjlsqe rlskqy, (1890) 134 Q.O. 31; Flkap t. Q.O., (1890) 137 Q.O.
202; rllh t. Q.O., (1891) 138 Q.O. 157; Ek oa OefXsyW Fsdfol, (1891) 140
Q.O. 291; Ek oa Nlpp (1891) 140 Q.O. 453; Blkd Usa Pfkd t. Q.O., (1893)
149 Q.O. 698; IWqqlw t. Q.O. (1895) 156 Q.O. 237; Nlpak t. Q.O. (1896)
161 Q.O. 29; Q.O. t. VsYhao, (1896) 161 Q.O. 475; Slkd Sfkd t. Q.O.
(1896) 163 Q.O. 228; Peljmplk t. QqWe, (1898) 170 Q.O. 343; IWwvaii t.
ulv, (1900) 176 Q.O. 581; Ilqap t. Q.O. (1900) 178 Q.O. 458; BfZaifqy,
aqY, rl. t. Q.O.. (1902) 187 Q.O. 315; DWvWff t. IWkhfYea (1903) 190
Q.O. 197. 
(63) Q.O. t. HW RakdaWkYa, (1796) 3 uWii. Q.O. 297; rlisjXfW cWkh t.
Khaiy, (1819) 4 SeaWq. Q.O. 235; LWoplkp t. caZbloZ. (1830) 3 Laq. Q.O.
433; Hftfkdpqlk t. Illoa, (1833) 7 Laq. Q.O. 469; SaXpqao t. NafZ,
(1850) 11 Dlv. Q.O. 437; LakkpyitWkfW t. SeaaifWd, aqY., cofZda rl.,
(1851) 13 Dlv. Q.O. 518; FspqfYap t. IsooWy, (1869) 9 SWii. Q.O. 274;
xZvWoZp t. xiiflqq, (1874) 21 SWii. Q.O. 532; LaWoplk t. UavZWii, (1877)
95 Q.O. 294; IaxioWqe t. Q.O. (1880) 102 Q.O. 426; Omfap t. Eiifklfp
(1887) 123 Q.O. 131; AohWkpWp RWiiay HWkZ. aqY., rl. t. IWkk (1889) 130
Q.O. 69; xfiakXaYhao t. Liyjlsqe rlskqy. (1890) 134 Q.O. 31; SefqaeaWZ
t. OeWqqsYh, (1891), 138 Q.O. 146; OYlqq t. Jaaiy, (1891) 140 Q.O. 106;
rWqap t. Aiiak (1893) 149 Q.O. 451; Blkd Usa Pfkd t. Q.O., (1893) 149
Q.O. 698; rlsdeoWk t. cfdailv, (1896) 164 Q.O. 301; SWihao t. Jav
IawfYl, aqY., N. rl.. (1897) 165 Q.O. 693; refYWdl, aqY., N. rl. t.
refYWdl (1897) 166 Q.O. 226; AjaofYWk LsX. rl. t. Bfpeao (1897) 166 Q.O.
464; BfZaifqy, aqY., rl. t. Q.O. (1902) 187 Q.O. 315. 
(64) Oj YW"Z YfqaZ fk klqa 1, psmoW. 
(65) LaotaWo t. IWppWYespaqqp (1866) 5 SWii. Q.O. 475; Omfap t. Eiifklfp
(1887) 123 Q.O. 131; IWkkfkd t. BoakYe, (1890)  133 Q.O. 186;
xfiakXaYhao t. Liyjlsqe rlskqy, (1890) 134 Q.O. 31; IYxitWfka t. cospe,
(1891) 142 Q.O. 155, K'Jafif t. Raojlkq, (1892) 144 Q.O. 323; IYulkWiZ
t. IWppWYesppaqqp (1901) 180 Q.O. 311. 
(66) Hftfkdpqlk t. Illoa, (1833) 7 Laq. Q.O. 469; Omfap t. Eiifklfp
(1887) 123 Q.O. 131. 
   "Pefp dltaokjakq fp WYhklviaZdaZ Xy Wii ql Xa lka lb aksjaoWqaZ
mlvaop. Pea mofkYfmia, qeWq fq YWk awaoYfpa lkiy qea mlvaop doWkqaZ ql
fq, vlsiZ paaj qll WmmWoakq ql eWta oansfoaZ ql Xa akbloYaZ Xy Wii qelpa
Wodsjakqp vefYe fqp akifdeqakaZ bofakZp, vefia fq vWp ZamakZfkd Xabloa
qea malmia, blskZ fq kaYappWoy ql soda. PeWq mofkYfmia fp klv
skftaopWiiy WZjfqqaZ. csq qea nsapqflk oapmaYqfkd qea awqakq lb qea
mlvaop WYqsWiiy doWkqaZ fp maomaqsWiiy Wofpfkd, WkZ vfii molXWXiy
Ylkqfksa ql Wofpa, Wp ilkd Wp lso pypqaj peWii awfpq." I'rsiilYe t.
IWoyiWkZ, (1819) 4 SeaWq. Q.O. 405. 
(67) refpelij t. CalodfW. (1793) 2 uWii. Q.O. 419; Dliifkdpvloqe t.
RfodfkfW, (1798) 3 uWii. Q.O. 378; IWoqfk t. Dskqao, (1816) 1 SeaWq.
Q.O. 304; I'rsiilYe t. IWoyiWkZ. (1819) 4 SeaWq. Q.O. 316; AkZaoplk t.
uskk, (1821) 6 SeaWq Q.O. 204; rleak t. RfodfkfW (1821) 6 SeaWq Q.O.
264; KpXlok t. Q.O. cWkh (1824) 9 SeaWq. Q.O. 738; csYhkao t. Bfkiay,
(1829) 2 Laq. Q.O. 586; AXiajWk t. cllqe, (1858) 21 Dlv. Q.O. 506;
rliiaYqlo t. uWy, (1870) 11 SWii. Q.O. 113; riWbbfk t. DlspajWk, (1876)
93 Q.O. 130; EkjWk OqaWjpefm rl. t. Pfkhao, (1876) 94 Q.O. 238; Q.O. t.
Blw. (1876) 94 Q.O. 315; Pakkappaa t. uWtfp (1879) 100 Q.O. 257; Omfap
t. Eiifklfp, (1887) 123 Q.O. 131; LliilYh t. BWojaop' H & P. rl., (1895)
157 Q.O. 429; Blopyqe t. DWjjlkZ, (1897) 166 Q, O. 506; Oq. Akqelky
BWiip SWqao Llvao rl. t. Oq. LWsi SWqao rlj'op, (1897) 168 Q.O. 349;
Ifpplsof, aqY., N. rl., t. DWXao (1898) 169 Q.O. 613; DWkYlYh Isq. H
Ekp. rl. t. SWooak, (1901) 181 Q.O. 73; GWkpWp t. rliloWZl. 185 Q.O.
125; AkZoavp t. AkZoavp (1903) 188 Q.O. 14; resoYe t. Gaipay, (1887) 121
Q.O. 282; KsWYefqW LWYhaq rl. t. Afhak, (1887) 127 Q.O. 444; Sapqaok
Qkflk Pai. rl. t. LakZiaqlk. (1887) 122 Q.O. 347; clvjWk t. refYWdl,
aqY. N. rl.. (1888) 126 Q.O. 465; IWelk t. FspqfYa (1888) 127 Q.O. 700;
Hafpy t. DWoZfk (1890) 135 Q.O. 100; IWkYeapqao t. IWppWYespaqqp (1891)
139 Q.O. 240. 
   "Pea maomaqsfqy WkZ fkZfpplisXfifqy lb qea Qkflk Xy kl jaWkp fjmifap
qea ilpp lb ZfpqfkYq WkZ fkZftfZsWi awpqakYa, lo lb qea ofdeq lb
paib-dltaokjakq Xy qea OqWqap. QkZao qea AoqfYiap lb rlkbaZaoWqflk aWYe
OqWqa oaqWfkaZ fqp pltaoafdkqy, boaaZlj, WkZ fkZamakZakYa, WkZ ataoy
mlvao, gsofpZfYqflk, WkZ ofdeq klq awmoappiy ZaiadWqaZ ql qea QkfqaZ
OqWqap. QkZao qea rlkpqfqsqflk, qelsde qea mlvaop lb qea OqWqap vaoa
jsYe oapqofYqaZ, pqfii, Wii mlvaop klq ZaiadWqaZ ql qea QkfqaZ OqWqap,
klo molefXfqaZ ql qea OqWqap, Woa oapaotaZ ql qea OqWqap oapmaYqftaiy,
lo ql qea malmia.... Jlq lkiy, qeaoabloa, YWk qeaoa Xa kl ilpp lb
pamWoWqa WkZ fkZamakZakq Wsqlkljy ql qea OqWqap, qeolsde qeafo skflk
skZao qea rlkpqfqsqflk, Xsq fq jWy Xa klq skoaWplkWXiy pWfZ qeWq qea
moapaotWqflk lb qea OqWqap, WkZ qea jWfkqakWkYa lb qeafo dltaokjakqp,
Woa Wp jsYe vfqefk qea Zapfdk WkZ YWoa lb qea Ylkpqfqsqflk Wp qea
moapaotWqflk lb qea Qkflk WkZ qea jWfkqakWkYa lb qea kWqflkWi
dltaokjakq. Pea rlkpqfqsqflk, fk Wii fqp moltfpflkp, illhp ql Wk
fkZapqosYqfXia Qkflk, YljmlpaZ lb fkZapqosYqfXia OqWqap." PawWp t.
Sefqa, (1868) 7 SWii. Q.O. 700. 
(68) Kefl t. uliifplk. (1904) 194 Q.O. 445. 
   "PeWq qea bfopq qak WoqfYiap lb WjakZjakqvaoa klq fkqakZaZ ql ifjfq
qea mlvaop lbqea OqWqa dltaokjakqp fk oapmaYq ql qeafo lvk malmia, Xsq
ql lmaoWqa lk qea kWqflkWi dltaokjakq Wilka, vWp ZaYfZaZ jloa qeWk W
eWib Yakqsoy Wdl, WkZ qeWq ZaYfpflk eWp Xaak pqaWZfiy WZeaoaZ ql pfkYa."
Omfap t. Eiifklfp (1887) 123 Q.O. 166. 
(69) "Ammloqflkjakq fp Wk lmaoWqflk lk OqWqap, WkZ fktlitap tWisWqflkp
WkZ Wppappjakqp vefYe Woa WoXfqoWoy, WkZ pelsiZ klq Xa oaploqaZ ql Xsq
fk YWpa lb kaYappfqy. Qkfblojfqy fp Wk fkpqWkq lmaoWqflk lk fkZftfZsWip,
vfqelsq qea fkqaotakqflk lb Wppappjakqp, lo Wky oadWoZ ql OqWqap, WkZ
fp Wq lkYa aWpy, YaoqWfk, WkZ abbfYWYflsp." Lao LWqqaoplk, F., fk Dyiqlk
t. Q.O. (1794) 3 uWii. Q.O. 180. 
(70) (1895) 157 Q.O. 429, 158 Q.O. 601. 
(71) (1880) 103 Q.O. 168. 
(72) (1824) 9 SeaWq. Q.O. 1. 
(73) (1824) 9 SeaWq. Q.O. 1. 
(74) Jloqeaok OaYsofqfap rl. t. Q.O. (1904) 193 Q.O. 197. 
(75) Pea mlvao YlkbaooaZ Xy qefp moltfpflk lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk "fp qea
mlvao ql oadsiWqa; qeWq fp, ql moapYofXa qea osia Xy vefYe YljjaoYa fp
ql Xa dltaokaZ. Pefp mlvao, ifha Wii lqeaop tapqaZ fk rlkdoapp, fp
Yljmiaqa fk fqpaib, jWy Xa awaoYfpaZ ql fqp sqjlpq awqakq, WkZ
WYhklviaZdap kl ifjfqWqflkp, lqeao qeWk Woa moapYofXaZ fk qea
rlkpqfqsqflk." Lao Io. refab FspqfYa IWopeWii, fk CfXXlkp t. KdZak
(1824) 9 SeaWq. Q.O. 197. 
(76)    "Pea mlvao ql oadsiWqa YljjaoYa Yltaop W vfZa bfaiZ, WkZ ajXoWYap
W  doaWq tWofaqy lb psXgaYqp. Olja lb qeapa psXgaYqp YWii blo skfbloj
osiap WkZ kWqflkWi iadfpiWqflk; lqeaop YWk Xa Xapq oadsiWqaZ Xy osiap
WkZ moltfpflkp psddapqaZ Xy qea tWoyfkd YfoYsjpqWkYap lb Zfbbaoakq
ilYWifqfap, WkZ ifjfqaZ fk qeafo lmaoWqflk ql psYe ilYWifqfap
oapmaYqftaiy. Pl qefp awqakq qea mlvao ql oadsiWqa YljjaoYa jWy Xa
awaoYfpaZ Xy qea OqWqap. Seaqeao qea mlvao fk Wky dftak YWpa fp tapqaZ
awYispftaiy fk qea dakaoWi dltaokjakq ZamakZp smlk qea kWqsoa lb qea
psXgaYq ql Xa oadsiWqaZ." CfijWk t. LefiWZaimefW (1865) 3 SWii. Q.O.
726. Oaa Wipl rlliay t. clWoZ lb SWoZakp (1851) 12 Dlv. Q.O. 319. xwm.
IYJfai (1871) 13 SWii Q.O. 240; IlXfia rlskqy t. GfjXWii (1881) 102 Q.O.
691; SWiifkd t. IfYefdWk (1886) 116 Q.O. 455; NlXXfkp t. OeaiXy rlskqy
PWwfkd ufpq. (1887) 120 Q.O. 492. 
(77) Jloqeaok OaYsofqfap rl. t. Q. O., (1904) 193 Q. O. 197. 
(78) IYroaWZy t. RfodfkfW (1876) 94 Q.O. 391. 
(79) Caaot. rlkkaYqfYsq (1896) 161 Q.O. 519. 
(80) HWvqlk t. Oqaaia (1894) 152 Q.O. 133.  
(81) 3 ci. rlj. 129. 
(82) xw m. Uaodao, (1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 95. 
(83) Ek oa JaWdia, (1890), 136 Q. O. 1; Ek oa BoaZaofYe. (1893) 140 Q.O.
70. 
(84) AXiajWk t. cllqe (1858) 21 Dlv. Q.u. 506; PWoXia'p rWpa (187i) 13
SWii. Q.O. 397. 
(85) Pea doaWq WkZ iaWZfkd fkqakq lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk WkZ qea iWv jspq
Xa hamq YlkpqWkqiy fk tfav smlk qea awWjfkWqflk lb ataoy nsapqflk lb
YlkpqosYqflk. PeWq fkqakq, fk oapmaYq ql qea vofq lb eWXasp Ylomsp, fp
jWkfbapq. Eq fp qeWq ataoy Yfqfzak jWy Xa molqaYqaZ Xy gsZfYfWi WYqflk
bolj skiWvbsi fjmofplkjakq. Pl qeWq akZ qea AYq lb 1789 moltfZaZ qeWq
ataoy Ylsoq lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqa pelsiZ eWta mlvao ql fppsa qea vofq. Pea
gsofpZfYqflk qesp dftak fk iWv ql qea YfoYsfq WkZ ZfpqofYq Ylsoqp fp
lofdfkWi; qeWq dftak Xy qea rlkpqfqsqflk WkZ qea iWv ql qefp Ylsoq fk
WmmaiiWqa. Cftak fk dakaoWi qaojp, fq jspq kaYappWofiy awqakZ ql Wii
YWpap ql vefYe qea gsZfYfWi mlvao lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap awqakZp, lqeao
qeWk qelpa awmoappiy awYamqaZ bolj fq." xw m. Uaodao, (1868) 8 SWii.
Q.O. 101. 
(86) (1866) 4 SWii. (Q.O.) 2. 
(87) "Ol jsYe fjmloqWkYa ZfZ qea Ylktakqflk WqqWYe ql fq [qea
molefXfqflk WdWfkpq qea mWppWda lb Wky aw mlpq bWYql iWv], qeWq fq fp
blskZ qvfYa fk qea rlkpqfqsqflk, bfopq Wp W oapqoWfkq smlk qea mlvao lb
qea dakaoWi dltaokjakq, WkZ WbqaovWoZp Wp W ifjfqWqflk smlk qea
iadfpiWqfta mlvao lb qea OqWqap." Gofkd t. Ifpplsof, (1882) 107 Q.O.
227. 
   "Aii qea oapqofYqflkp YlkqWfkaZ fk qea rlkpqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ
OqWqap lk qea mlvao lb qea OqWqa iadfpisqsoap vaoa moltfZaZ fk bWtlo lb
qea Wsqelofqy lb qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq. Pea molefXfqflk WdWfkpq qeafo
jWhfkd Wky ap mlpq bWYql iWvp vWp fkqolZsYaZ blo doaWqao YWsqflk, WkZ
taoy molXsXiy Wolpa bolj qea hklviaZda qeWq, qea LWoifWjakq lb CoaWq
cofqWfk YiWfjaZ WkZ awaoYfpaZ W mlvao ql mWpp psYe iWvp, skZao qea
ZakljfkWqflk lb Xfiip lb sqqWfkZao. lo Xfiip lb mWfkp WkZ makWiqfap."
rWiZao t. csii (1798) 3 uWii. Q.O. 386. 
(88) rsjjfkdp t. Ifpplsof. (1866) 4 SWii. Q.O. 323. 
(89) (1866) 4 SWii. Q.O. 277. 
(90) (1866) 4 SWii. Q.O. 333. 
(91) BiaqYeao t. LaYh (1810) 6 roWkYe Q.O. 138. 
   "HWvp lb qefp YeWoWYqao Woa lmmoappfta, skgspq, WkZ qyoWkkfYWi; WkZ,
Wp psYe, Woa YlkZajkaZ Xy qea skftaopWi pakqakYa lb YftfifzaZ jWk. Pea
fkgspqfYa WkZ qyoWkky vefYe YeWoWYqaofzap aw Llpq bWYql iWvp Ylkpfpq
Wiqldqqeao fk qeafo oaqolpmaYqfta lmaoWqflk, vfqe WmmifaZ vfqe ansWi
bloYa, Wiqelsde klq awYispftaiy, ql Xfiip lb WqqWfkZao." KdZak t.
OWskZaop, (1827) 12 SeaWq. Q.O. 266. 
(92) rWomakqao t. LakkpyitWkfW, (1854) 17 Dlv. Q.O. 456. 
(93) "Ap qea YiWspa vWp bfopq WZlmqaZ, qea vloZp YlkYaokfkd YlkqoWYqp
vaoa klq fk fq, XaYWspa fq vWp psmmlpaZ qeWq qea meoWpa,`aw Llpq bWYql
iWv' fkYisZaZ iWvp YlkYaokfkd YlkqoWYqp Wp vaii Wp lqeaop. csq fq vWp
WpYaoqWfkaZ Xabloa qea Yljmiaqflk lb qea fkpqosjakq qeWq qefp vWp W
meoWpa vefYe, fk xkdifpe gsofpmosZakYa, eWZ WYnsfoaZ W pfdkfbfYWqflk
ifjfqaZ ql qea YofjfkWi iWv, WkZ qea vloZp `lo iWv fjmWfofkd qea
lXifdWqflk lb YlkqoWYqp' vaoa WZZaZ ql dfta paYsofqy ql ofdeqp oapqfkd
fk YlkqoWYqp. 2 cWkYolbq'p Dfpqloy lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk, 213." Gofkd t.
Ifpplsof, (1882) 107 Q. O. 227. 
   "Pea atfi vefYe qefp fkefXfqflk lk qea OqWqap vWp fkqakZaZ ql moatakq
fp blskZ fk qea efpqloy lb lso Natlisqflk. cy oamaWqaZ WYqp lb
iadfpiWqflk fk qea Zfbbaoakq OqWqap, Zsofkd qeWq atakqbsi maoflZ, qea
lXifdWqflk lb YlkqoWYqp vWp fjmWfoaZ. Pea qfja WkZ jlZa lb mWyjakq vaoa
WiqaoaZ Xy iWv; WkZ pl bWo vWp qefp fkqaobaoakYa lb iadfpiWqflk YWoofaZ,
qeWq YlkbfZakYa Xaqvaak jWk WkZ jWk vWp vaii-kfde ZapqolyaZ. Pelpa
molYaaZfkdp doav lsq lb qea mWmao pypqaj lb qeWq ZWy; WkZ qea fkgsofap
vefYe qeay fkbifYqaZ vaoa Zaamiy baiq fk qea Ylskqoy Wq qea qfja qea
rlkpqfqsqflk vWp WZlmqaZ. Pea moltfpflk vWp ZapfdkaZ ql moatakq qea
OqWqap bolj bliilvfkd qea moaYaZakq lb iadfpiWqflk pl ZajloWifzfkd fk
fqp abbaYqp, WkZ pl ZapqosYqfta ql qea YljjaoYfWi molpmaofqy lb W
Ylskqoy." Lao Io. FspqfYa IYHaWk, fk reWoiap Nftao cofZda t. SWooak
cofZda (1837) 11 Laq. Q.O. 573. Oaa Wipl xZvWoZp t. GaWozay (1877) 96
Q.O. 604, aq pan. 
(94) (1837) 11 Laq. Q.O. 420. 
(95) "Eq fp Yljmaqakq blo qea OqWqap ql YeWkda qea bloj lb qea oajaZy,
lo ql jlZfby fq lqeaovfpa, Wp qeay jWy paa bfq, moltfZaZ kl psXpqWkqfWi
ofdeq paYsoaZ Xy qea YlkqoWYq fp qeaoaXy fjmWfoaZ. Jl Wqqajmq eWp Xaak
jWZa ql bfw Zabfkfqaiy qea ifka Xaqvaak WiqaoWqflkp lb qea oajaZy vefYe
Woa ql Xa ZaajaZ iadfqfjWqa, WkZ qelpa vefYe, skZao qea bloj lb
jlZfbyfkd qea oajaZy, fjmWfo psXpqWkqfWi ofdeqp. xtaoy YWpa jspq Xa
ZaqaojfkaZ smlk fqp lvk YfoYsjpqWkYap." Rlk DlbbjWk t. MsfkYy. (1866)
4 SWii. Q.O. 553. 
(96) Q. O. cWkh t. uataoaWsw, (1809) 5 roWkYe Q.O. 61. 
(97) CWppfap t. cWiilk, (1832) 6 Laq. Q.O. 761. 
(98) AsdspqW cWkh t. xWoia, (1839) 13 Laq. Q.O. 519; HWbWyaqqa Ekp. rl.
t. BoakYe, (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 404, usYWq t. refYWdl (1870) 10 SWii.
Q.O. 410; Hftaomlli Ekp. rl. t. IWppWYespaqqp (1870) 10 SWii. Q.O. 566;
LWsi t. RfodfkfW, (1869) 8 SWii. Q.O. 168; LefiWZaimefW Bfoa ApplY t.
Jav Uloh, (1886) 110 Q.O. 110; LajXfkW rlkpli. Ofitao Ifk., aqY.. rl.
t. LakkpyitWkfW (1888) 
125 Q.O. 181; Kofakq Ekp. rl. t. uWddp, (1899) 172 Q.O. 561. 
   "A doWkq lb YlomloWqa awfpqakYa fp W doWkq lb pmaYfWi moftfiadap ql
qea YlomloWqlop, akWXifkd qeaj ql WYq blo YaoqWfk ZapfdkWqaZ msomlpap
Wp W pfkdia fkZftfZsWi, WkZ awajmqfkd qeaj (skiapp lqeaovfpa apmaYfWiiy
moltfZaZ) bolj fkZftfZsWi ifWXfifqy. Pea YlomloWqflk, Xafkd qea jaoa
YoaWqflk lb ilYWi iWv, YWk eWta kl iadWi awfpqakYa XaylkZ qea ifjfqp lb
qea pltaoafdkqy veaoa YoaWqaZ. . . . Eq jspq Zvaii fk qea miWYa lb fqp
YoaWqflk, WkZ YWkklq jfdoWqa ql Wklqeao pltaoafdkqy." LWsi t. RfodfkfW,
(1868) 8 SWii. Q.O. 181. 
(99) Akdil-AjaofYWk Loltfpflk rl. t. uWtfp Loltfpflk rl., (1903) 191
Q.O.373. 
(100) Dlja Ekp. rl. t. Ilopa, (1874) 20 SWii. Q.O. 445; ulyia t.
rlkqfkakqWi Ekp. rl., (1876) 94 Q.O. 635; cWoolk t. csokpfZa, (1887) 121
Q. O. 186. 
   "Pea rlkpqfqsqflk lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap ZaYiWoap qeWq qea gsZfYfWi
mlvao lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap peWii awqakZ ql Wii YWpap fk iWv WkZ ansfqy
Wofpfkd skZao qeWq rlkpqfqsqflk, qea iWvp lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqao, WkZ ql
qea qoaWqfap jWZa lo vefYe peWii Xa jWZa skZao qeafo Wsqelofqy. . . .
ql Ylkqoltaopfap Xaqvaak W OqWqa WkZ Yfqfzakp lb Wklqeao OqWqa, WkZ
Xaqvaak Yfqfzakp lb Zfbbaoakq OqWqap.. Pea gsofpZfYqflk lb qea BaZaoWi
Ylsoqp, skZao qefp YiWspa lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk, ZamakZp smlk WkZ fp
oadsiWqaZ Xy qea iWvp lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap. OqWqa iadfpiWqflk YWkklq
Ylkbao gsofpZfYqflk smlk qea baZaoWi Ylsoqp, klo YWk fq ifjfq lo
oapqofYq qea Wsqeolfqy dftak Xy rlkdoapp fk msopsWkYa lb qea
rlkpqfqsqflk." Dlja Ekp. rl. s. Ilopa, (1874) 120 SWii. Q.O. 463. 
(101) ciWha t. IYriskd, (1898) 172 Q.O. 230, veaoa qea Ylsoq pWfZ:
"Aiqelsde, dakaoWiiy pmaWhfkd, qea OqWqa eWp qea mlvao ql moapYofXa qea
YlkZfqflkp smlk vefYe bloafdk YlomloWqflkp jWy akqao fqp qaoofqloy blo
msomlpap lb Xspfkapp, psYe W mlvao YWkklq Xa awaoqaZ vfqe qea abbaYq lb
ZabaWqfkd lo fjmWfofkd ofdeqppaYsoaZ qlYfqfzakp lb qea pataoWi OqWqap
Xy qea psmoaja iWv lb qea iWkZ." 
(102) LajXfkW rlkpli. Ofitao Ifk., aqY., rl. t. LakkpyitsWfW (1888) 125
Q.O. 181. 
(103) SWoZ t. IWoyiWkZ, (1870) 12 SWii. Q.O. 419; Csy t. cWiqfjloa,
(1879) 100 Q. O. 434; SWiifkd t. IfYefdWk. (1886) 116 Q. O. 446. 
   "Jl pqWqa YWk, Ylkpfpqakqiy vfqe qea BaZaoWi rlkpqfqsqflk, fjmlpa smlk
qea molZsYqp lb lqeao OqWqap, Xolsdeq qeaoafk blo pWia lo spa, lo smlk
Yfqfzakp XaYWspa akdWdaZ fk qea pWia qeaoafk. lo qea qoWkpmloqWqflk
qeaoaql, lb qea molZsYqp lb lqeao OqWqap, jloa lkaolsp msXifY XsoZakp
lo qWwap qeWk fq fjmlpap smlk qea ifha molZsYqp lb fqp lvk qaoofqloy.
Eq qefp vaoa klq pl, fq fp aWpy ql maoYafta elv qea mlvao lb rlkdoapp
ql oadsiWqa YljjaoYa vfqe bloafdk kWqflkp WkZ Wjlkd qea pataoWi OqWqap
YlsiZ Xa moWYqfYWiiy WkksiiaZ, WkZ qea ansWifqy lb YljjaoYfWi moftfiadap
paYsoaZ Xy qea BaZaoWi rlkpqfqsqflk ql Yfqfzakp lb qea pataoWi OqWqap
Xa jWqaofWiiy WXofZdaZ WkZ fjmWfoaZ." Csy t. cWiqfjloa (1979) 100 Q.O.
439. 
   "CoWkq qeWq qea OqWqap jWy fjmlpa ZfpYofjfkWqfkd qWwap WdWfkpq qea
Yfqfzakp lb lqeao OqWqap, WkZ fq vfii pllk Xa blskZ qeWq qea mlvao
YlkbaooaZ smlk rlkdoapp ql oadsiWqa fkqaopqWqa YljjaoYa fp lb kl tWisa,
Wp qea skoapqofYqaZ mlvao lb qea OqWqap ql qWw vfii molta ql Xa jloa
abbfYWYflsp ql moljlqa fkansWifqy qeWk Wky oadsiWqfpjp vefYe rlkdoapp
YWk mWpp ql moapaota qea ansWifqy lb ofdeq YlkqajmiWqaZ Xy qea
rlkpqfqsqflk Wjlkd qea Yfqfzakp lb qea pataoWi OqWqap. xwYfpa qWwap, fq
fp ataoyveaoa YlkYaZaZ, jWy Xa fjmlpaZ Xy qea OqWqap, fb klq fk Wky
pakpa ZfpYofjfkWqfkd; Xsq fq pelsiZ klq Xa blodlqqak qeWq qea malmia lb
qea pataoWi OqWqap ifta skZao lka Yljjlk rlkpqfqsqflk, vefYe vWp
loZWfkaZ ql apqWXifpe gspqfYa, WkZ vefYe, vfqe qea iWvp lb rlkdoapp, WkZ
qea qoaWqfap jWZa Xy qea molmao Wsqelofqy, fp qea psmoaja iWv lb qea
iWkZ; WkZ qeWq qeWq psmoaja iWv oansfoap ansWifqy lb XsoZak. WkZ bloXfZp
ZfpYofjfkWqflk fk OqWqa qWwWqflk veak qea mlvao fp WmmifaZ ql qea
Yfqfzakp lb lqeao OqWqap. EkansWifqy lb XsoZak, "vaii Wp qea vWkq lb
skfblojfqy fk YljjaoYfWi oadsiWqflkp, vWp lka lb qea dofatWkYap lb qea
Yfqfzakp skZao qea rlkbaZaoWqflk; WkZ qea klv rlkpqfqsqflk vWp WZlmqaZ,
Wjlkd lqeao qefkdp, ql oajaZy qelpa ZabaYqp fk qea moflo pypqaj." SWoZ
t. IWoyiWkZ. (1870) 12 SWii. Q.O. 430. 
(104) rloplk t. IWoyiWkZ (1887) 120 Q.O. 502. 
(105) rlkkao t. xiiflqq. (1885) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 691. 
"AYYloZfkd ql qea awmoapp vloZp WsZ YiaWo jaWkfkd lb qefp YiWspa, kl
moftfiadap Woa paYsoaZ Xy fq, awYamq qelpa vefYe Xailkd ql Yfqfzakpefm.
Nfdeqp, WqqWYeaZ Xy qea iWv ql YlkqoWYqp Xy oaWplk lb qea miWYa veaoa
psYe YlkqoWYqp Woa jWZa lo awaYsqaZ, veliiy fooapmaYqfta lb qea
Yfqfzakpefm lb qea mWoqfap ql qelpa YlkqoWYqp, YWkklq Xa ZaajaZ
`moftfiadap lb W Yfqfzak,' vfqefk qea jaWkfkd lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk."
rlkkao t. xiiflqq, (1855) 18 Dlv. Q.O. 593. 
(106) PoWtaiaop Ekp. rl. t. rlkkaYqfYsq, (1902) 185 Q.O. 364. Oaa Wipl
xiZofZda t. PoazatWkq. (1896) 160 Q.O. 452. 
   Ek mWppfkd smlk qea YlkpqfqsqflkWifqy lb qWw iWvp, qea Ylsoq "YWk lkiy
YlkpfZao qea iadfpiWqflk qeWq eWp Xaak eWZ, WkZ Zaqaojfka veaqeao lo kl
fqp kaYappWoy lmaoWqflk oapsiqp fk Wk skgspq ZfpYofjfkWqflk Xaqvaak qea
mWoqfap YeWodaZ vfqe fqp XsoZakp. Eq fp aklsde qeWq qea OqWqa eWp
paYsoaZ W oaWplkWXiy bWfo ZfpqofXsqflk lb XsoZakp, WkZ qeWq kl
fkqakqflkWi ZfpYofjfkWqflk eWp Xaak jWZa WdWfkpq klk-oapfZakqp.....
LaobaYq ansWifqy WsZ maobaYq skfblojfqy lb qWwWqflk Wp oadWoZp
fkZftfZsWip lo YlomloWqflkp. lo qea Zfbbaoakq YiWppap lb molmaoqy
psXgaYq ql qWwWqflk, fp W ZoaWj skoaWifzaZ." PoWtaiiaop Ekp. rl. t.
rlkkaYqfYsq. (1902) 185 Q.O. 364. 
(107) reajskd rWkWi cWkh t. Hlvaoy, (1876) 93 Q.O. 72. 
(108) OiWsdeqao-Dlspa rWpap (1872) 16 SWii. Q.O. 36. 
(109) Gfjjfpe t. cWii, (1889) 120 Q.O. 217. 
(110) NafZ t. rliloWZl, (1902) 187 Q.O. 137. 
(111) (1901) 181 Q.O. 108. 
(112) IYroaWZy t. RfodfkfW, (1878) 94 Q.O. 301; Caao t. rlkkaYqfYsq
(1806) 161 Q. O. 519; IWkYeapqao t. IWppWYespaqqp (1891) 139 Q.O. 240;
HWvqlk t. Oqaaia, (1804) 152 Q.O. 133. 
   Ak WmmolmofWqflk Xy qea OqWqa lb "fqp qfZia vWqaop WkZ qeafo XaZp ql
Xa spaZ Xy fqp malmia Wp W Yljjlk blo qWhfsd WkZ YsiqftWqfsd bfpe, pl
bWo Wp fq jWy Xa Zlka vfqelsq lXpqosYqfkd kWtfdWqflk,... fp fk bWYq
klqefkd jloa qeWk W oadsiWqflk lb qea spa Xy qea malmia lb qeafo Yljjlk
molmaoqy. Pea ofdeq vefYe qea malmia lb qea OqWqa qesp WYnsfoa Yljap klq
bolj qeafo Yfqfzakpefm Wilka, Xsq bolj qeafo Yfqfzakpefm WkZ molmaoqy
YljXfkaZ. Eq fp, fk bWYq, W molmaoqy ofdeq, WkZ klq W jaoa moftfiada lo
fjjskfqy lb Yfqfzakpefm." IYroaWZy t. RfodfkfW (1876) 94 Q.O. 395. 
(113) Dlijap t. Fakkfplk, (1840) 14 Laq. Q.O. 540. 
(114) GakqsYhy t. uakkfplk, (1860) 24 Dlv. Q.O. 66. 
(115) xw m. Naddai, (1885) 114 Q.O. 642. 
   "Hllhfkd . . . ql qea vloZp lb qqea rlkpqfqsqflk - ql qea lXtflsp
mlifYy WkZ kaYappfqy lb qefp moltfpflk qlmoapaota eWojlkd Xaqvaak
OqWqap, WkZ loZao WkZ iWv vfqefk qeafooapmaYqfta XloZaop, WkZ ql fqp
aWoiy WZlmqflk Xy qea Ylilkfap, WkZ qeak Xy qea YlkbaZaoWqaZ OqWqap,
velpa jsqsWi fkqaoapq fqvWp ql dfta aWYe lqeao WfZ WkZ psmmloq
veakataofq vWpkaaZaZ - qea YlkYispflk fp fooapqfXia, qeWq qefp
YljmWYqakdoWbqaZ fk qea rlkpqfqsqflk fkYisZaZ, WkZ vWp fkqakZaZ ql
fkYisZa, ataoy lbbakpa jWZa mskfpeWXia Xy iWv lb qea OqWqa fk vefYe fq
vWp YljjfqqaZ, WkZ qeWq fq dftap qea ofdeq ql qea awaYsqfta Wsqelofqy
lb qea OqWqa ql ZajWkZ qea bsdfqfta bolj qea awaYsqfta Wsqelofqy lb qea
OqWqa fk vefYe ea fp blskZ; qeWq qea ofdeq dftak ql `ZajWkZ' fjmifap
qeWq fq fp Wk WXplisqa ofdeq; WkZ fq bliilvp qeWq qeaoa jspq Xa W
YlooaiWqfta lXifdWqflk ql Zaiftao, vfqelsq Wky  oabaoakYa ql qea
YeWoWYqao lb qea Yofja YeWodaZ, lo ql qea mlifYy lo iWvp lb qea OqWqa
ql vefYe qea bsdfqfta eWp biaZ." GakqsYhy t. uakkfplk (1860) 24 Dlv.
Q.O. 103. 
(116) IWelk t. FspqfYa, (1888) 127 Q. O. 700. 
(117) HWpYaiiap t. CalodfW, ( 1893) 148 Q. O. 537; NlXaoqp t. Nafiiy,
(1885) 116 Q. O. 80; 12 Aj. WkZ xkd. xkYyY. lb HWv (2Z aZ.) 606. 
   "Eq fp paqqiaZ Xy qea ZaYfpflkp lb qefp Ylsoq qeWq, awYamq fk qea YWpa
lb W bsdfqfta psooakZaoaZ Xy W bloafdk dltaokjakq, qeaoa fp klqefkd fk
qea rlkpqfqsqflk, qoaWqfap lo iWvp lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap vefYe awajmqp
Wk lbbakZao, Xolsdeq Xabloa qea Ylsoqp lb W OqWqa blo Wk lbbakYa WdWfkpq
fqp iWvp, bolj qofWi WkZ mskfpejakq, atak qelsde Xolsdeq bolj Wklqeao
OqWqa Xy skiWvbsi tfliakYa, lo Xy WXspa lb iadWi molYapp." HWpYaiiap t.
CalodfW, (1893) 148 Q. O. 543. 
(118) Q.O. t. NWspYeao, (1886) 119 Q. O. 407. 
(119) Lalmia t. DyWqq, (1902) 72 J.U. 170, WkZ YWpap YfqaZ 
(120) (186K) 24 Dlv. Q.O. 103. 
(121) LaWoYa t. PawWp, (1894) 155 Q. O. 311. 
(122) Hsqeao t. cloZak, (1849) 7 Dlv. Q.O. 1. 
   "QkZao qefp WoqfYia lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk fq oapqp vfqe rlkdoapp ql
ZaYfZa veWq dltaokjakq fp qea apqWXifpeaZ lka fk W OqWqa. Blo qea QkfqaZ
OqWqap  dsWoWkqaa ql aWYe OqWqa W oamsXifYWk dltaokjakq, rlkdoapp jspq
kaYappWofiy ZaYfZa veWq dltaokjakq fp apqWXifpeaZ fk qea OqWqa Xabloa
fq YWk Zaqaojfka veaqeao fq fp oamsXifYWk lo klq. AkZ veak qea pakWqlop
WkZ oamoapakqWqftaplb W OqWqa Woa WZjfqqaZ fkql qea YlskYfip lb qea
Qkflk, qea Wsqelofqy lb qea dltaokjakq skZao vefYe qeay Woa WmmlfkqaZ,
Wp vaii Wp fqp oamsXifYWk YeWoWYqao, fp oaYldkfzaZ Xy qea molmao
YlkpqfqsqflkWi Wsqelofqy. AkZ fqp ZaYfpflk fp XfkZfkd lk ataoy lqeao
ZamWoqjakq lb qea dltaokjakq, WkZ YlsiZ klq Xa nsapqflkaZ fk W gsZfYfWi
qofXskWi... Ol qll, Wp oaiWqap ql qea YiWspa fk qea WXlta-jakqflkaZ
WoqfYia lb qea rlkpqfqsqflk, moltfZfkd bloYWpap lb ZljapqfY tfliakYa.
Eq oapqaZ vfqe rlkdoapp, qll, ql Zaqaojfka smlk qea jaWkp molmao ql Xa
WZlmqaZ ql bsibfi qefp dsWoWkqaa. Peay jfdeq, fb qeay eWZ ZaajaZ fq jlpq
WZtfpWXia ql Zl pl, eWta miWYaZ fq fk qea mlvao lb W Ylsoq ql ZaYfZa
veak qea YlkqfkdakYy eWZ eWmmakaZ vefYe oansfoaZ qea BaZaoWi dltaokjakq
ql fkqaobaoa. csq rlkdoapp qelsdeq lqeaovfpa, WkZ kl ZlsXq vfpaiy; WkZ
Xy qea AYq lb BaXosWoy 28, 1795,...qea mlvao lb ZaYfZfkdveaqeao qea
awfdakYy eWZ Wofpak smlk vefYe qea dltaokjakq lb qea QkfqaZ OqWqap fp
XlskZ ql fkqaobaoa, fp dftak ql qea LoapfZakq." Hsqeao t. cloZak (1849)
7Dlv. Q.O. 1. 
(123) PawWp t. Sefqa, (1868) 7 SWii. Q.O. 700. 
(124) Ek oa uskYWk (1891) 139 Q. O. 449. 
(125) PWyilo t. caYheWj, (1900) 178 Q. O. 548. 
(126) GakqsYhy t. uakkfplk, (1860) 24 Dlv. Q.O. 103. 
(127) SfiifWjp t. Ifppfppfmmf (1898) 170 Q. O. 213; Coaak t. Ifiip. (r.
r. A. 1895) 69 BaZ. Nam. 862, 159 Q.O. 651; Cfiap t. DWoofp (1903) 189
Q. O. 486. 
(128) RfZWi v. LefiWZaimefW (1844) 2 Dlv. Q.O. 198. 
(129) Blo Wk fkqaoapqfkd WYYlskq lb qea oaWplkp iaWZfkd ql qea WZlmqflk
lb qefp moltfpflk WkZ qea jWkkao lb fqp WZlmqflk, paa NaykliZp t. Q. O.,
(1878) 98 Q. O. 162-194. 
   "Pea lmmoapfta jaWpsoap WZlmqaZ, WkZ qea Yosaiqfap WkZ mskfpejakqp
fkbifYqaZ Xy qea dltaokjakqp lb xsolma blo jWky Wdap, ql Yljmai mWoqfap
ql Ylkbloj, fk qeafo oaifdflsp Xaifabp WkZ jlZap lb vlopefm, ql qea
tfavp lb qea jlpq ksjaolsp paYq, WkZ qea bliiy lb Wqqajmqfkd fk qeWq vWy
ql Ylkqoli qea jakqWi lmaoWqflkp lb maoplkp, WkZ akbloYa Wk lsqvWoZ
Ylkkblojfqy ql W moapYofXaZ pqWkZWoZ, iaZ ql qea WZlmqflk lb qea
WjakZjakq fk nsapqflk. Eq vWp katao fkqakZaZ lo psmmloaZ qeWq qea
WjakZjakq YlsiZ Xa fktlhaZ Wp W molqaYqflk WdWfspq iadfpiWqflk blo qea
mskfpejakq lb WYqp fkfjfYWi ql qea maWYa, dllZ loZao WkZ jloWia lb
plfaqy." uWtfp t. caWplk, (1890) 133 Q.O. 342. 
(130) Paooaqq t. PWyilo (1815) 9 roWkYe Q.O. 43. 
(131) NaykliZp t. Q.O. (1878) 98 Q.O. 145. 
   cy qea moltfpflk WdWfkpq Wky iWv lb rlkdoapp oapmaYqfkd Wk
apqWXifpejakq lb oaifdflk, lo molefXfqfkd qea taoy awaoYfpa qeaoalb, lo
WXofZdfkd qea boaaZlj lb pmaaYe lo lb qea moapp, "rlkdoapp vWp ZamoftaZ
lb Wii iadfpiWqfta mlvao ltao jaoa lmfkflk. Xsq vWp iabq boaa ql oaWYe
WYqflkp vefYe vaoa fk tfliWqflk lb plYfWi Zsqfap, lo psXtaopfta lb dllZ
WoZlz." NaykliZp t. Q.O. (1878) 98 Q.O. 164. 
(132) uWtfp t. caWplk, (1890) 133 Q.O. 333; resoYe lb Fapsp reofpq t.
Q. O., (1890) 136 Q.O. 1. 
(133) coWZbfaiZ t. NlXaoqp, (1899) 175 Q. O. 291. 
(134) xw m. RWiiWkZfdeWj, (1863) 1 SWii. Q.O. 243. 
(135) Q. O. t. SfiifWjp (1904) 194 Q. O. 270, veaoa qea Ylsoq pWfZ: "Sa
Woa klq ql Xa skZaopqllZ Wp ZamoaYWqfkd qea tfqWi fjmloqWkYa lb boaaZlj
lb pmaaYe WkZ lb qea moapp, lo Wp psddapqfkd ifjfqWqflkp lk qea pmfofq
lb ifXaoqy, fk fqpaib skYlknsaoWXia, Xsq qefp YWpa Zlap klq fktlita
qelpa YlkpfZaoWqflkp. Pea biWjfkd XokWZ vefYe dsWoZp qea oaWij veaoa kl
esjWk dltaokjakq fp kaaZaZ pqfii XWop qea akqoWkYa; WkZ Wp ilkd Wp esjWk
dltaokjakqp akZsoa qeay YWkklq Xa ZakfaZ qea mlvao lb paib-moapaotWqflk.

   "Ek fkYlomloWqfkd qeapa mofkYfmiap (qea bfopq qak WjakZjakqp ql qea
rlkpqfqsqflk) fkql qea bskZWjakqWi iWv, qeaoa vWp kl fkqakqflk lb
ZfpoadWoZfkd qea awYamqflkp, vefYe YlkqfksaZ ql Xa oaYldkfzaZ Wp fb qeay
eWZ Xaak blojWiiy awmoappaZ. Pesp qea boaaZlj lb pmaaYe WkZ lb qea moapp
(AoqfYia E) Zlap klqmaojfq qea msXifYWqflk lb ifXaip, XiWpmeajlsplo
fkZaYakq WoqfYiap, lo lqeao msXifYWqflkp fkgsoflsp ql msXifY jloWip lo
moftWqa oamsqWqflk." NlXaoqplk t. cWiZvfk (1897) 165Q.O. 281. 
(136) "Eq fp vaii skZaopqllZ, WkZ oaYaftaZ Wp W YljjakqWoy lk qefp
moltfpflk blo qea ifXaoqy lb qea moapp, qeWq fq vWp fkqakZaZ ql moatakq
Wii psYe moatflsp oapqoWfkqp smlk msXifYWqflkp Wp eWZ Xaak moWYqfYaZ Xy
lqeao dltaokjakqp, WkZ fk aWoiy qfjap eaoa, ql pqfbia qea abbloqp lb
mWqoflqp qlvWoZp ajifdeqakfkd qeafo baiilv psXgaYqp smlk qeafo ofdeqp
WkZ qea Zsqfap lb osiaop. Pea ifXaoqy lb qea moapW vWp ql Xa
skoapqoWfkaZ, Xsq ea vel spaZ fq vWp ql Xa oapmlkpfXia fk YWpa lb fqp
WXspa; ifha qea ofdeq ql haam bfoa Wojp, vefYe Zlap klq molqaYq efj vel
spap qeaj blo WkklyWkYa lo ZapqosYqflk." Lao LWohao, r.F., fk rlj. t.
ciWkZfkd, (1825) 3 LfYh. (IWpp.) 314. 
(137) IWoifk Bfoa Aojp rl. t. OefaiZp, (1902) 171 J. U. 384, WkZ YWpap
YfqaZ. 
(138) Kefl t. uliifplk, (1904) 194 Q. O. 446. 
 

